Block2: a comprehensive open source framework to develop and apply
state-of-the-art DMRG algorithms in electronic structure and beyond
Huanchen Zhai,a) Henrik R. Larsson,b) Seunghoon Lee,c) Zhi-Hao Cui,d) Tianyu Zhu,e) Chong Sun,f) Linqing
Peng, Ruojing Peng, Ke Liao,g) Johannes T¨ olle, Junjie Yang, Shuoxue Li, and Garnet Kin-Lic Chanh)
Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA
(Dated: 28 November 2023)
block2 is an open source framework to implement and perform density matrix renormalization group and
matrix product state algorithms. Out-of-the-box it supports the eigenstate, time-dependent, response, and
finite-temperature algorithms. In addition, it carries special optimizations for ab initio electronic structure
Hamiltonians and implements many quantum chemistry extensions to the density matrix renormalization
group, such as dynamical correlation theories. The code is designed with an emphasis on flexibility, extensi-
bility, and efficiency, and to support integration with external numerical packages. Here we explain the design
principles and currently supported features and present numerical examples in a range of applications.
I. INTRODUCTION
The density matrix renormalization group (DMRG)
algorithm1–3 is now a widely used numerical approach to
obtain the low-energy eigenstates and other properties of
a wide range of systems of interest in electronic structure,
such as strongly correlated low-dimensional models, 4–8
large active space problems in quantum chemistry, 9–18
electronic quantum dynamics, 19,20 and even models to
benchmark quantum computing protocols. 21,22 Over the
last several decades, there have been many develop-
ments and extensions of the original algorithm for
these applications.23–25 For example, dynamical electron
correlation,26,27 the effects of finite temperature, 28,29
relativistic effects, 30 time-dependent phenomena, 31 and
frequency-dependent32 response properties, can now all
be treated within the DMRG framework.
In parallel with these theoretical advances, we have
also witnessed the success of many different DMRG im-
plementations for electronic structure, 11,13,33–44 which
together have helped demonstrate the power of DMRG
in different settings. However, as more extensions of the
DMRG algorithm have appeared and as DMRG tech-
niques have grown to encompass more applications, so
has the complexity grown in many implementations.
a)Electronic mail: hczhai.ok@gmail.com
b)Present address: Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of California, Merced, CA 95343, USA
c)Present address: Department of Chemistry, Seoul National Uni-
versity, Seoul 151-747, South Korea
d)Present address: Department of Chemistry, Columbia University,
New York, NY 10027, USA
e)Present address: Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New
Haven, CT 06520, USA
f)Present address: Department of Chemistry, Rice University,
Houston, Texas 77005, USA
g)Present address: Department of Physics and Arnold Sommerfeld
Center for Theoretical Physics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨ at
M¨ unchen, D-80333 Munich, Germany
h)Electronic mail: gkc1000@gmail.com
The new open source block2 code45 introduced here,
represents an effort to provide users with a comprehen-
sive set of state-of-the-art DMRG algorithms used to-
day in electronic structure and other applications, while
enabling access to the development and extensions of
these methods. To this end, the core design principles
in block2 aim to balance efficiency, flexibility, and sim-
plicity. For example:
(i) For efficiency and flexibility, we provide a special
highly optimized DMRG implementation for the stan-
dard quantum chemistry Hamiltonian, but many of the
optimizations also accelerate computations with arbi-
trary sparse Hamiltonians, thus enabling production level
applications involving custom Hamiltonians.
(ii) For efficiency and simplicity, we provide both opti-
mized and unoptimized implementations of most features
in the code, so a developer can always start with the
simplest version to explore new ideas, or compare dif-
ferent implementations to understand our optimization
techniques. The framework supports both the matrix
product state (MPS)/matrix product operator (MPO)
and renormalized operator views of DMRG algorithms,
balancing the ease of expressing algorithms with opti-
mized performance.
(iii) For flexibility and simplicity, while the algorithms
in block2 support general Hamiltonian and operator
expressions, e.g. arbitrary-order interactions, arbitrary-
order density matrix computations, and arbitrary-order
excitations, the computations can be specified through a
simple symbolic Python syntax.
We note that to achieve the above design goals, many
implementations in block2 use techniques that to our
knowledge have not been published in the literature. The
following does not attempt to provide a full description
of the implementation, which after all comprises approx-
imately 200,000 lines of code. Instead, we introduce a
sample of the existing features of block2, some ideas
behind the implementation, and how the capabilities are
used in applications and algorithm development.
arXiv:2310.03920v2  [physics.chem-ph]  25 Nov 2023
2
II. PROGRAM FEATURES
A. Standard DMRG
block2 provides a highly optimized and flexible im-
plementation of the DMRG algorithm for solving various
aspects of the electronic structure problem using ab ini-
tio and model Hamiltonians. This section presents an
overview of the most common features of the code used
in electronic structure calculations.
1. Ab initio DMRG and symmetries
The most common application of the ab initio DMRG
algorithm is to compute a many-body ground state wave-
function with some desired symmetries. 2,35,41,42,46–48
One first requires the Hamiltonian expressed in a basis of
orthogonal orbitals, which form the sites in DMRG. Such
orbitals, and the corresponding Hamiltonian integrals,
can be computed by many quantum chemistry packages,
for example, PySCF.49,50
The Hamiltonian expressed in the chosen orbital ba-
sis typically has a number of symmetries. block2 has
built-in efficient support for many different symmetries
[including particle-number U(1), 34 total spin SU(2), 35
projected spin U(1), 34 K-point Zn,51 SO(4) in the Hub-
bard model,52,53 and the Abelian point group (D 2h and
its subgroups24)] and is designed to be easily extensible
to other symmetries.
Fig. 1 illustrates the computational scaling with bond
dimension of the ab initioDMRG algorithm implemented
in block2 using different spin symmetries. We note that
the actual scaling of ab initio DMRG is lower than the
formal O(M3) scaling (where M is the MPS bond dimen-
sion), mainly due to the use of symmetries and block-
sparse matrix operations.54
2. Sweep algorithms
Standard DMRG optimizations (sweeps) update the
wavefunction in one of two ways, termed the two-site
and one-site algorithms.2,56,57 The local Hilbert space in
DMRG refers to the Fock space of the site, which is of,
e.g. dimension d = 4 for a spatial orbital and d = 2 for
a spin orbital. Assuming each DMRG site is a spatial
orbital, the two-site algorithm uses the product space of
the larger two-site local Hilbert space d = 16 and the
left and right block renormalized states to represent the
DMRG renormalized wavefunction (which helps escape
from local minima) while the one-site algorithm substi-
tutes the d = 4 local Hilbert space, lowering memory
and computational costs. An effective “half-site” calcu-
lation with d = 2 can also be performed by using the
one-site algorithm with spin orbital sites. One can also
fuse sites in the sweep [by contracting adjacent tensors in
the Hamiltonian matrix product operator (MPO)] before
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
MPS bond dimension M
102
103
104
Wall time per sweep T (seconds)
[Fe2S(CH3)(SCH3)4]3
Fit T = M2.40/ 194476
DMRG (non-spin-adapted)
Fit T = M2.18/ 18450
DMRG (spin-adapted)
FIG. 1. The scaling of DMRG wall time (using 24 CPU
cores) per sweep with respect to the MPS bond dimension
M, for the (36o, 48e) active space of a protonated iron sul-
fur dimer [Fe2S(CH3)(SCH3)4]3−. The active space model is
from Ref. 55. Spin-adapted uses particle-number and SU(2)
symmetry, while non-spin-adapted uses particle-number and
projected-spin U(1) symmetry.
performing DMRG, allowing block2 to perform larger
site sweep optimizations.
We note that the dimension of the local Hilbert space
on different sites need not be the same. For example,
DMRG algorithms with one or two large sites 58 use a
single site to represent all the virtual and/or core orbitals
to efficiently treat dynamic correlation. In such cases,
block2 supports mixing the one-site and two-site sweep
algorithms to balance efficiency and accuracy. 58
3. Excited states
The ground-state DMRG algorithm can be extended to
optimize excited states and such excited-state algorithms
are available in block2. The excited-state algorithms
implemented in block2 take the following forms:
(i) The state-averaged DMRG approach.59 In this for-
malism, there is a common set of rotation matrices for all
states, but the center site carries a unique tensor (renor-
malized wavefunction) for each state. This algorithm is
normally a robust and convenient choice for tens of roots,
but for a given bond dimension, the accuracy decreases
as the number of roots is increased.
(ii) The projected orthogonalization approach. 40,60,61
To improve the quality of the states obtained from the
state-averaged DMRG, one can further refine each ex-
cited state (as an independent MPS) by projecting out
lower-lying states when optimizing the central site.
(iii) The level-shift approach. 33,39 Here, we compute
the ground and excited states one-by-one with a modified
3
level-shifted Hamiltonian defined as
ˆH′
k = ˆH +
k−1X
i=1
wi|Ψi⟩⟨Ψi| (1)
where |Ψi⟩ are the converged states below the targeted
excited state |Ψk⟩, and wi are the energy level shifts.
This can be combined with the state-averaged ansatz to
determine batches of states at a time.
(iv) The Harmonic Davidson approach.59 By changing
the standard Davidson solver to the Harmonic Davidson
solver, one can directly target interior excited states close
to a given energy without computing all the states below.
In the current implementation of block2, this approach
is not as stable as the above approaches for dense spectra.
4. Relativistic effects
Relativistic effects can be classified into scalar rela-
tivistic and spin-dependent relativistic effects, 62 where
the mean-field level scalar relativistic effects can be de-
scribed inexpensively.63 Block2 supports several strate-
gies to include the scalar and spin-dependent relativistic
effects.
(i) Relativistic DMRG. 64–66 We can directly solve
for eigenstates of four-component Dirac-Coulomb,
Dirac-Coulomb-Gaunt, or Dirac-Coulomb-Breit
Hamiltonians.67 Here DMRG is performed in com-
plex number mode where both the MPS and MPO are
complex.
(ii) One-step SOC-DMRG. 68 Within the two-
component formalism of relativistic quantum chemistry,
we can include spin-orbit coupling (SOC) by adding a
SOC term to the scalar-relativistic Hamiltonian, and
then perform DMRG on this two-component Hamil-
tonian with a complex MPO and MPS. Alternatively,
we can simplify the SOC term within the spin-orbit
mean-field (SOMF) approximation,69 giving rise to com-
plex one-electron and real two-electron integrals. One
can then represent the Hamiltonian as the sum of two
MPOs where the expensive two-electron interaction is
contained only in the second MPO, which is completely
real.68 One then runs block2 in the hybrid complex
and real arithmetic DMRG mode, where the real and
imaginary parts of the effective wavefunction share the
same real rotation matrices in the MPS.
(iii) Two-step SOC-DMRG.30,70,71 When the SOC ef-
fect is weak, we can first compute eigenstates of the
scalar-relativistic Hamiltonian. Then SOC effects can
be added by carrying out the state-interaction of a small
number of eigenstates.
Fig. 2 shows a numerical comparison of the accuracy
of the 1-step and 2-step SOC-DMRG treatments.
189 273 441
Number of 2-step pure-spin states
10 1
100
101
102
|E2 step E1 step| (cm 1)
[DyCl6]3
2nd excited state (with SOC)
15th excited state (with SOC)
FIG. 2. The energy difference between representative excited
states computed from the 1-step and 2-step SOC-DMRG ap-
proaches, for the (7o, 9e) active space of the [DyCl6]3− cluster.
Adapted from Fig. 4(a) in Ref. 68.
5. Non-standard Hamiltonians and operators
In addition to computations involving the standard
Hermitian quantum chemistry Hamiltonian with up to
two-body interaction terms, block2 supports the use of
other types of non-standard Hamiltonians and operators
in DMRG algorithms and/or MPO/MPS operations.
(i) General Hamiltonians with high-order interactions.
Using the techniques in Section II C, block2 supports
DMRG computations with arbitrary parity-preserving
(i.e. even number of creation and annihilation opera-
tor) Hamiltonians. For example, DMRG calculations
can be carried out for Hamiltonians with three-body
or up to n-body terms. We note that higher than
two-body terms appear commonly in quantum chem-
istry in effective Hamiltonians obtained from similarity
transformations72 or canonical transformations 73–76 of
the ab initio Hamiltonians.
(ii) Normal-ordered Hamiltonians.77 The DMRG algo-
rithm can work instead with the normal-ordered version
of a Hamiltonian where the vacuum expectation value is
separated out. This can make the DMRG algorithm with
reduced floating point precision numerically more stable.
(iii) Non-Hermitian Hamiltonians. 72,78–80 This allows
DMRG to be used, for example, with Hamiltonians that
arise from many-body similarity transformations, such as
in coupled cluster theory or the transcorrelated method.
(iv) Anti-Hermitian operators. block2 has special
support for anti-Hermitian operators. Exponentials of
anti-Hermitian operators appear in various applications,
most notably, when performing orbital rotations of the
MPS, or in canonical transformation theory. 74 The ex-
plicit support for anti-Hermitian operators allows such
unitaries to be expressed as an exponential of a real
MPO, thus avoiding complex arithmetic.
4
(v) General MPO and MPS operations with arbitrary
operators. block2 supports MPO and MPS opera-
tions with arbitrary operators, including non-number-
conserving operators, as described in Section II D. For
example, to support the MPS compression approach for
strongly-correlated NEVTP2,81 one needs to apply a par-
tial Hamiltonian to the reference wavefunction to get the
perturber wavefunction
|Ψ′
i⟩ =
X
abc
viabc a†
aa†
bac

|Ψ0⟩ (2)
In block2 this is done by building an MPO for the op-
erator part (as indicated by the parenthesis) in the above
expression.
6. Initial guesses
block2 provides several ways to generate initial MPS
guesses for various algorithms. It also provides an imple-
mentation of perturbative noise56,57 which helps DMRG
algorithms escape from poor initial guesses.
(i) A random MPS with the desired bond dimension
can be generated.24
(ii) One can supply an estimate of the occupancy in-
formation at each site from a cheaper method [e.g. cou-
pled cluster singles and doubles (CCSD)]. block2 then
uses this information to construct the initial quantum
number distribution in the MPS (by assuming that the
probability distribution of the occupancy at each site is
independent from each other).
(iii) We can generate an initial guess from another
(more approximate) MPS using fitting. For example, we
can use an MPS parameterized and optimized in the sin-
gles and doubles excitation space to initialize the MPS
in the full Hilbert space.
(iv) We can construct an initial guess MPS from a
given linear combination of determinants or Configura-
tion State Functions (CSFs).
7. Orbital reordering algorithms
For a given bond dimension, the accuracy of DMRG is
affected by the orbital ordering. 82 block2 provides sev-
eral options to choose good orbital orderings in DMRG.
(i) For molecules with non-trivial point group sym-
metries, it can group the orbitals by irreducible
representation.83,84
(ii) For less symmetric systems, it can choose an order-
ing using the Fiedler vector 85 of an appropriate metric
matrix. This ordering method is very inexpensive. 86,87
(iii) The Fiedler ordering can be further optimized us-
ing a more expensive genetic algorithm (GA), 87 as used
in the StackBlock code.60 In block2, this GA is reim-
plemented with greatly increased efficiency.
The Fiedler and GA orderings require one to define a
metric to measure the correlation between pairs of or-
bitals. block2 can use the absolute value of the ex-
change matrix87 or the two-orbital mutual information
[computed from the one- and two-orbital density matri-
ces (1 and 2ODMs)] 88 for this purpose.
8. DMRG-CASSCF
For typical quantum chemistry problems, it is often
not possible to treat all orbitals in DMRG. One can
combine DMRG with the Complete Active Space Self-
Consistent Field (CASSCF) method 89,90 to use DMRG
to approximate the FCI problem within the active space
while optimizing the active space orbitals. 91–95 Using
block2 we can perform DMRG-CASSCF through in-
terfaces provided by external quantum chemistry pack-
ages, such as PySCF.49,50 With PySCF we currently
support DMRG-CASSCF energy optimization92 for spin
restricted and spin unrestricted orbitals, and DMRG-
CASSCF gradients and geometry optimization94 for spin
restricted orbitals.
B. High performance DMRG
Parallelization in ab initioDMRG is essential to realis-
tic chemical problems. In block2 we have implemented
a hierarchy of different parallel and related DMRG strate-
gies.
1. Standard parallelization strategies
In a recent report, 96 we summarized five standard
parallel DMRG strategies implemented in block2: (i)
parallelism over the sum of sub-Hamiltonians, 97 (ii)
parallelism over sites, 98,99 (iii) parallelism over normal
and complementary operators,24,100 (iv) parallelism over
symmetry sectors,11,101 and (v) parallelism within dense
matrix multiplications.101,102 For large scale calculations,
it is essential to combine these strategies to achieve high
performance.96
We have implemented most of these strategies in
block2 not only for the ground state optimization prob-
lem, but also for other types of calculations, such as time
evolution and the calculation of response properties. The
user can change the parallelization strategy at runtime to
maximize the efficiency of custom workflows
Fig. 3 shows a numerical example of the performance
of parallel DMRG.
2. Integral distribution strategies
In large ab initiocalculations, the memory to store the
two-electron integrals of the Hamiltonian can be a bottle-
5
448 672 1008 1512 1960 2800
Number of CPU cores
1
2
3
4
5
6Average speed-up relative to 448 cores
ideal
MPS bond dimension M = 3000
MPS bond dimension M = 4000
FIG. 3. Speed-up of average wall time per sweep relative to
the Ncore = 448 case for different MPS bond dimensions using
parallel DMRG algorithms, for solving the ground state in a
(108o, 30e) active space of the benzene molecule 103 using a
cc-pVDZ basis.104 Adapted from Fig. 4 in Ref. 96.
neck. In block2 we provide several integral/MPO distri-
bution strategies to balance the CPU, disk, and memory
consumption in such calculations.
(i) In the default strategy for small- to medium-sized
problems, integrals are replicated across different nodes,
which provides the most flexibility for the DMRG al-
gorithm. In this case, we have the freedom to switch
between the normal/complementary (NC) paralleliza-
tion strategy and the complementary/normal (CN) par-
allelization strategy near the middle site of a sweep, 11
which leads to higher computational efficiency.
(ii) For larger calculations where integral replication
is problematic, we provide an alternative strategy where
each node only stores the portion of integrals required
by that node. This strategy reduces the communication
and memory costs, at the price of slightly reduced CPU
efficiency.96
(iii) When the number of orbitals is large and localiza-
tion has been performed, there are many small or close-
to-zero integral elements. block2 can store the inte-
grals in a compressed format to further reduce memory
consumption, using a floating point number compression
algorithm introduced in Ref. 96. (Note that this only
affects the memory consumption before the Hamiltonian
MPO is built.)
(iv) For even larger scale applications, the MPOs con-
structed from the sub-Hamiltonians can also consume a
large amount of memory on each node (since each MPO
must contain at least the same amount of information as
contained in the integrals). To alleviate this problem, we
can store the MPO primarily on disk and only the MPO
tensors required at the given one or two sites in an itera-
tion of the sweep algorithm are loaded into memory. Note
that MPO storage is not a problem in traditional DMRG
implementations like StackBlock where the action of
the MPO is performed on the fly.
(v) At the cost of introducing some error, the bond
dimension of the sub-Hamiltonian MPOs can be com-
pressed during the construction as described in Sec-
tion II C.
3. Parallelization strategies for specific tasks
The aforementioned parallelization strategies are com-
mon to a wide range of DMRG algorithms. We have ad-
ditionally implemented more specialized parallelization
strategies for some specific computational tasks.
(i) The generation of the Hamiltonian matrix elements
in large-site DMRG calculations (used e.g. to treat mul-
tireference dynamical correlation58) is implemented with
shared-memory parallelization over the determinants or
CSFs.
(ii) Green’s function calculations in dynamical
DMRG105 are parallelized in a distributed manner over
the site index of the one-particle Green’s function matrix
element.
(iii) Stochastic perturbative DMRG106 is implemented
with a hybrid shared-memory and distributed paralleliza-
tion to sample determinants or CSFs.
(iv) The GA algorithm for orbital reordering 87 is im-
plemented with distributed parallelization over the dif-
ferent initial populations in a multi-start style GA algo-
rithm.
(v) The MPS compression step in the DMRG ver-
sion of second order strongly-contracted N-Electron Va-
lence States for Multireference Perturbation Theory (SC-
NEVPT2)81 is implemented with distributed paralleliza-
tion over virtual orbital indices.
C. General operators and MPO construction algorithms
block2 provides full support for algorithms involv-
ing general Hamiltonians (and other operators) expressed
as MPOs. The implementation in block2 is carefully
designed to support such general operations while not
(severely) sacrificing efficiency. As discussed in Ref. 97,
the original ab initioDMRG algorithm107 implicitly pro-
vides an efficient implementation of the expectation value
of a sparse MPO, but does not explicitly construct the
MPO. The advantages of an explicit MPO object for rel-
evant operators and Hamiltonians is that a wider variety
of algorithms can be easily implemented. However, naive
implementations of the MPO for complicated operators
such as the ab initio Hamiltonian lead to the wrong cost
scaling.97 Consequently, block2 uses the techniques de-
scribed below to achieve high efficiency.
6
1. Symbolic MPO approach for ab initio Hamiltonians
To obtain performance competitive with traditional
implementations of ab initio DMRG (such as the one
found in StackBlock),34,35 Block2 provides a sym-
bolic MPO class for ab initio Hamiltonians. Here, the
multiplication of the MPO matrices is interpreted as a set
of formulae that reproduce the DMRG equations in tra-
ditional ab initio implementations. Symbolic MPOs are
available for different spin symmetries:S2 (SU2), Sz, and
no spin symmetry, and support the Normal/Complemen-
tary (NC) partition, the Complementary/Normal (CN)
partition, and the more efficient mixed partition with a
NC to CN transformation near the middle site. 11 In ad-
dition, simplification rules are applied during the sym-
bolic multiplication of the MPO matrices to use the in-
dex permutation and transposition symmetry of the nor-
mal and complementary operators11 (such as ˆAij = − ˆAji
where ˆAij is defined as a†
i a†
j). This reduces the number
of non-redundant renormalized operators that have to be
stored and computed during DMRG sweeps. With this
optimization, the DMRG algorithm implemented via the
symbolic MPO is more memory efficient than with MPOs
constructed using other approaches. In addition, because
the symbols correspond to the labels of renormalized op-
erators in a traditional DMRG algorithm, we can also
implement conventional DMRG parallelization strategies
in the literature within this MPO approach. 97,100
2. General MPO construction for Hamiltonians
block2 also implements general operator and Hamil-
tonian MPOs efficiently. At the interface level, the user
writes the definition of the operator as a symbolic ex-
pression, using characters in a string to represent ele-
mentary operators such as ˆ a† and ˆa. If non-standard
elementary operators are required, the user can define
the matrix representation of each elementary operator
in a Python script. Bosonic operators 108,109 and general
Pauli strings84 are supported. Starting from such an arbi-
trary symbolic expression of a many-body operator (such
as the Hamiltonian), and the matrix representation of the
involved elementary operators (in any local orthonormal
basis), the code generates the MPO automatically. One
can then use the MPO to optimize or evaluate expecta-
tion values, and carry out other DMRG computations.
Both spin-adapted and non-spin-adapted MPOs can be
generated. Listing 1 is an example Python script for
performing DMRG of the Hubbard-Holstein model using
block2.
from pyblock2 . driver . core import DMRGDriver , SymmetryTypes , MPOAlgorithmTypes
import numpy as np
N_SITES_ELEC , N_SITES_PH , N_ELEC = 4, 4, 4
N_PH , U, OMEGA , G = 11 , 2, 0.25 , 0.5
L = N_SITES_ELEC + N_SITES_PH
driver = DMRGDriver ( scratch ="./ tmp ", symm_type = SymmetryTypes .SZ , n_threads =4)
driver . initialize_system ( n_sites =L, n_elec = N_ELEC , spin =0)
# [ Part A] Set states and matrix representation of operators in local Hilbert space
site_basis , site_ops = [] , []
Q = driver .bw.SX # quantum number wrapper ( n_elec , 2 * spin , point group irrep )
for k in range (L):
if k < N_SITES_ELEC :
# electron part
basis = [(Q(0 , 0, 0) , 1) , (Q(1 , 1, 0) , 1) , (Q(1 , -1, 0) , 1) , (Q(2 , 0, 0) , 1)] # [0 ab2 ]
ops = {
"": np. array ([[1 , 0, 0, 0] , [0 , 1, 0, 0] , [0 , 0, 1, 0] , [0 , 0, 0, 1]]) , # identity
"c": np. array ([[0 , 0, 0, 0] , [1 , 0, 0, 0] , [0 , 0, 0, 0] , [0 , 0, 1, 0]]) , # alpha +
"d": np. array ([[0 , 1, 0, 0] , [0 , 0, 0, 0] , [0 , 0, 0, 1] , [0 , 0, 0, 0]]) , # alpha
"C": np. array ([[0 , 0, 0, 0] , [0 , 0, 0, 0] , [1 , 0, 0, 0] , [0 , -1, 0, 0]]) , # beta +
"D": np. array ([[0 , 0, 1, 0] , [0 , 0, 0, -1], [0 , 0, 0, 0] , [0 , 0, 0, 0]]) , # beta
}
else :
# phonon part
basis = [(Q(0 , 0, 0) , N_PH )]
ops = {
"": np. identity ( N_PH ), # identity
"E": np. diag (np. sqrt (np. arange (1 , N_PH )), k= -1) , # ph+
"F": np. diag (np. sqrt (np. arange (1 , N_PH )), k =1) , # ph
}
site_basis . append ( basis )
site_ops . append ( ops )
# [ Part B] Set Hamiltonian terms in Hubbard - Holstein model
driver . ghamil = driver . get_custom_hamiltonian ( site_basis , site_ops )
7
b = driver . expr_builder ()
# electron part
b. add_term ("cd", np. array ([[i, i + 1, i + 1, i] for i in range ( N_SITES_ELEC - 1) ]). ravel () , -1)
b. add_term ("CD", np. array ([[i, i + 1, i + 1, i] for i in range ( N_SITES_ELEC - 1) ]). ravel () , -1)
b. add_term (" cdCD ", np. array ([[i, i, i, i] for i in range ( N_SITES_ELEC )]). ravel () , U)
# phonon part
b. add_term ("EF", np. array ([[ i + N_SITES_ELEC , ] * 2 for i in range ( N_SITES_PH )]). ravel () , OMEGA )
# interaction part
b. add_term (" cdE ", np. array ([[i, i, i + N_SITES_ELEC ] for i in range ( N_SITES_ELEC )]). ravel () , G)
b. add_term (" cdF ", np. array ([[i, i, i + N_SITES_ELEC ] for i in range ( N_SITES_ELEC )]). ravel () , G)
b. add_term (" CDE ", np. array ([[i, i, i + N_SITES_ELEC ] for i in range ( N_SITES_ELEC )]). ravel () , G)
b. add_term (" CDF ", np. array ([[i, i, i + N_SITES_ELEC ] for i in range ( N_SITES_ELEC )]). ravel () , G)
# [ Part C] Perform DMRG
mpo = driver . get_mpo (b. finalize ( adjust_order = True ), algo_type = MPOAlgorithmTypes . FastBipartite )
mps = driver . get_random_mps ( tag =" KET ", bond_dim =250 , nroots =1)
energy = driver . dmrg (mpo , mps , n_sweeps =10 , bond_dims =[250] * 4 + [500] * 4,
noises =[1e -4] * 4 + [1e -5] * 4 + [0] , thrds =[1e -10] * 8, dav_max_iter =30 , iprint =2)
print (" DMRG energy = %20.15 f" % energy )
Listing 1. A Python script to setup the Hubbard-Holstein model Hamiltonian and perform DMRG to find the ground state
using block2. In the script, we use the characters c, d, C, D, E, and F (as an example) to represent the fermionic elementary
operators a†
α, aα, a†
β, and aβ and the bosonic elementary operators b† and b, respectively. The expected output of this script
(the ground state energy) is −6.956893.
The key to achieving efficiency is to construct MPOs
in such a way as to obtain sparse MPO tensors. We note
that MPOs contain a gauge degree of freedom and can
thus be written in multiple ways, but a sparse representa-
tion is typically available as the operators of interest are
quite restricted (e.g. of one- and two-particle form). To
correctly identify a sparse MPO representation, several
ideas have been discussed in the literature. 40,97,110,111 In
block2, we implement two of them.
(i) The bipartite approach. 111 This is an efficient
graph-theory-based approach to build an exact MPO
that identifies the best sparse representation. When used
with the ab initio Hamiltonian, this produces the opti-
mal MPO bond dimension and sparse structure of the
matrices, and thus the correct complexity in an ab initio
DMRG algorithm.
(ii) The singular value decomposition (SVD)
approach.97,112,113 This approach introduces the
possibility of MPO bond dimension compression. For
some operators, e.g. ab initio Hamiltonians of large
molecules, the MPO bond dimension reduction can
greatly increase the DMRG efficiency (see Fig. 4). For
large numbers of orbitals and/or high-order (more than
three-body) terms in the Hamiltonian, the direct SVD
of integral matrices can be expensive, and we alleviate
this problem by performing SVD for each symmetry
block of the MPO tensors separately. Although the SVD
does not preserve sparsity, sparsity can be introduced
using the sub-Hamiltonian strategy, 97 which recovers
the correct DMRG complexity and MPO tensor sparsity.
Fig. 4 shows a numerical example comparing MPOs
resulting from different constructions.
10 6
 10 5
 10 4
 10 3
MPO singular value cutoff
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000MPO bond dimension
Bipartite approach
SVD approach
10 6
 10 5
 10 4
 10 3
MPO singular value cutoff
10 8
10 5
10 2
H  error (Hartree)
FIG. 4. A comparison between the MPO bond dimensions for
MPOs constructed using the bipartite approach 111 and the
SVD approach97 with different cutoffs for the singular values,
for the (76o, 113e) active space model of the FeMo cofactor.114
The active space model is from Ref. 21. The inset plot shows
the error in the expectation value ⟨MPS|MPO|MPS⟩ com-
puted using MPOs constructed with different cutoffs and an
MPS (optimized using the exact MPO) with bond dimen-
sion M = 2000 for the FeMo cofactor system. In the SVD
approach, the cutoff was applied to the unrescaled singular
values of the unnormalized Hamiltonian integrals.
D. MPO/MPS algebra
The MPO and MPS representation of operators and
states allow one to view DMRG algorithms in a very
general sense as an extension of linear algebra.97 block2
supports this general perspective with a convenient inter-
8
face to MPO/MPS algebraic operations and algorithms.
The interface dispatches at the backend to several imple-
mentations for different levels of efficiency.
1. Sweep algorithms for MPO/MPS algebra
Consider a general MPO/MPS algebraic expression
|MPS′⟩ = poly(MPO)
 
α|MPS1⟩ + β|MPS2⟩

(3)
where poly(MPO) (can be a linear combination of pow-
ers of an MPO or its inverse), |MPS1⟩, and |MPS2⟩ are
known quantities, andα and β are known scalar numbers.
In one MPO/MPS algebra backend, we numerically find
|MPS′⟩ by fitting. Namely, starting from a trial |MPS′⟩,
we solve the optimization problem
max
|MPS′⟩
∥⟨MPS′|poly(MPO)
 
α|MPS1⟩ + β|MPS2⟩

∥ (4)
by updating the tensors in |MPS′⟩ using the one-site
or two-site sweep algorithms. Due to its similarity to
the standard DMRG algorithm, this procedure is imple-
mented very efficiently in block2. The standard caveats
of DMRG optimization apply however, namely, there can
be a dependence on the initial guess (especially for small
bond dimension) and the global optimality of the solution
is not guaranteed. Using this approach, block2 imple-
ments the following important primitives of MPO/MPS
algebra.
(i) Addition, subtraction, and scalar multiplication
of MPS. This is implemented by fitting |MPS′⟩ to
α|MPS1⟩ + β|MPS2⟩.
(ii) Matrix-vector multiplication. This is implemented
by fitting |MPS′⟩ to MPO |MPS⟩.
(iii) Linear equation or matrix inversion. This can
be formally expressed as |MPS′⟩ = MPO −1|MPS⟩. By
using sweep algorithms, 32,105,115 we can transform this
equation into an effective linear algebra equation de-
fined on one or two sites of |MPS′⟩, which can be solved
using iterative algorithms such as Conjugate Gradi-
ent (CG),116 MINRES,117, GCROT(m, k),118, IDRS,119
Chebyshev,120 and LSQR.121
(iv) Matrix exponentiation. This can be formally ex-
pressed as |MPS′⟩ = exp(−β MPO) |MPS⟩, and |MPS′⟩
can be found using the time-dependent DMRG methods
described in Section II G 3.
2. Exact algorithms for MPO/MPS algebra
MPO/MPS algebra can also be implemented exactly
using block-sparse tensor contraction operations. For
typical quantum chemistry problems the bond dimen-
sions of the MPS and MPOs are on the order of several
thousand, and intermediates generated by the contrac-
tion of MPS and MPO tensors can quickly exceed the
available memory. Nevertheless, this scheme can be use-
ful for model Hamiltonians with simpler interactions or
for benchmarking purposes.
To support exact MPO/MPS algebra, we provide a
separate open source library called pyblock3122 which
more fully exposes the tensor network view of DMRG
algorithms, at some cost to efficiency. In pyblock3,
the MPO, MPS, and block-sparse tensor objects can be
easily manipulated with an interface similar to perform-
ing operations on numpy arrays,123 so that arbitrary
MPO/MPS algebra is straightforward. We provide sub-
routines to translate MPO and MPS objects back and
forth between block2 and pyblock3. Note that we
do not currently support SU(2) symmetry in pyblock3,
thus this interoperability is only possible for non-spin-
adapted objects.
As MPS and MPO are represented as pure Python data
structures in pyblock3, users can further explore many
other possibilities through the interface between block2
and pyblock3. For example, utilizing the automatic
differentiation124 feature implemented in pyblock3, we
can perform gradient style optimization of MPO or MPS
tensors.
3. Symbolic manipulation and simplification of operator
expressions
For algebra involving only fermionic operators,
block2 provides an efficient symbolic engine to ma-
nipulate, simplify, and truncate expressions using
Wick’s theorem. 77 Compared to other existing simi-
lar implementations, 125–131 we provide a user friendly
Python interface with support for expressions arising in
spin-free, spin unrestricted, and general spin theories.
Once the algebraic simplifications have been performed,
the resulting symbolic expression can be converted into
an MPO using techniques in Section II C. Some examples
of applications include:
(i) MPO construction of the normal-ordered ˆH. Such
MPOs increase the numerical stability in low precision
DMRG.
(ii) MPO construction of ˆH2, used to compute the en-
ergy variance of an MPS. Note that computing the norm
of ˆH|MPS⟩ (by first constructing an MPS intermediate
of ˆH|MPS⟩ using fitting) is an alternative way to obtain
the variance which is also often cheaper.
(iii) MPO construction of e − ˆT ˆHe ˆT , which arises
in theories involving a similarity transform of the
Hamiltonian.77 In practice, we first rewrite the expres-
sion in terms of nested commutators using the Baker-
Campbell-Hausdorff expansion. After simplification (and
truncation if necessary) we obtain an expression that can
be used to generate the MPO.
Fig. 5 shows a numerical example of DMRG using a
similarity transformed Hamiltonian constructed from CC
amplitudes.
9
0E+00 2E-07 4E-07 6E-07 8E-07
Largest discarded weight
0
5
10
15
20
25
30Energy error E Eextrap (cm 1)
Estimated JCCSD/ST DMRG = 81 cm 1
[Fe2OCl6]2
DMRG for e THeT (Sz = 5)
DMRG for e THeT (Sz = 0)
FIG. 5. The extrapolation of DMRG sweep energies using
MPS bond dimension M = 600, 500, 400, 300, and 200, for the
(30o, 30e) active space of the similarity transformed Hamil-
tonian e − ˆT ˆHe
ˆT with only terms up to three-body interac-
tion kept after normal ordering, computed for the high spin
(Sz = 5) and low spin ( Sz = 0) states of the [Fe 2OCl6]2−
cluster, using the cc-pVDZ-DK basis and the exact two-
component relativistic correction.132 The cluster geometry is
from Ref. 133.
E. MPS analysis and properties
Once we have computed an MPS (e.g. from the DMRG
sweep algorithm) we can analyze it in terms of quantities
familiar to standard quantum chemistry. Below, we list
some representative quantities that can be extracted from
an MPS (or a pair of bra and ket MPSs) in block2.
1. N-particle reduced density matrices
N-particle density matrices ( N-PDMs)92,134,135 sum-
marize the information in a wavefunction and have many
applications across quantum chemistry, such as in orbital
optimization,91,92 (internally) contracted dynamical cor-
relation theories,130,135 and so on. In block2 we provide
an efficient algorithm to compute N-PDMs of MPS with
arbitrary N (in practice, only N < 5 can be computed
in non-trivial systems). The implementation has the fol-
lowing features.
(i) We support both N-PDMs (with integer N) and
transition N-PDMs (with integer or half-integer N). In
a unified framework, the user can compute spin-traced,
spin specific, or general spin PDMs.
(ii) The user can freely choose the fermionic operator
ordering in the N-PDMs via an operator string input pa-
rameter. For example, for the spin-traced 3-PDM, both
E(1)
abcdef :=
X
στλ
⟨a†
aσa†
bτ a†
cλadλaeτ afσ ⟩ (5)
and
E(2)
abcdef :=
X
στλ
⟨a†
aσabσa†
cτ adτ a†
eλafλ ⟩ (6)
notations are supported, where the former is compatible
with the StackBlock convention,60 and the latter is
used in the literature of spin-free NEVPT2. 136
(iii) When obtaining multiple N-PDMs or PDMs with
different operator orderings, they can be computed si-
multaneously within a single sweep so that intermediates
can be reused, saving computational time.
(iv) When only a part of the PDM is required (by
restricting the indices) we can compute only the required
part with a greatly reduced complexity. For example, the
diagonal 2-PDM
Eppqq :=
X
στ
⟨a†
pσapσa†
qτ aqτ ⟩ (7)
required in perturbative DMRG106 can be computed with
a complexity similar to that of the 1-PDM.
(v) We use a hybrid distributed and shared-memory
parallelization strategy. For the shared-memory part, we
use parallelism over non-redundant collective matrix el-
ement indices. For the distributed part, we use a hybrid
strategy based on parallelism over sub-operator-strings
and parallelism over single matrix element indices.
2. Entanglement analysis
We can compute various entanglement metrics of in-
terest from the MPS. 37,86,88,137,138
(i) One can access the bipartite entanglement
entropy137,139 in the MPS at each site after a standard
DMRG optimization.
(ii) The 1 and 2 orbital DMs 37 (ODMs) can be com-
puted using the general N-PDM interface implemented
in block2, with a computational scaling similar to that
of the 2-PDM. The mutual information matrix of orbital
interactions can be constructed from these ODMs, as a
measure of the entanglement between pairs of orbitals.138
The mutual information can then be used as the cost
function in GA,87 to find an optimal orbital ordering for
DMRG. Currently this feature is only implemented for
non-spin-adapted MPS.
3. Coefficients of configuration state functions or
determinants
In quantum chemistry applications, it is useful to
understand the determinant or CSF expansion of the
DMRG wavefunction (MPS) and these can be computed
using block2. In the following we provide some repre-
sentative use cases:
(i) In block2, one can extract all CSFs or determi-
nants and their coefficients where the absolute value of
10
the coefficient in the CI expansion is above a given thresh-
old. This uses a depth-first search algorithm performed
along the sweep. 140 When only a few CSFs or determi-
nants satisfy the criterion, the computational cost of this
algorithm is almost negligible. From the spin coupling
pattern in the dominant CSFs or determinants, one ob-
tains valuable insights into the electronic structure. Cur-
rently, for spin-adapted MPS with a non-zero total spin,
the algorithm is only implemented for MPS in the singlet-
embedding35 format.
(ii) We can use this algorithm to extract the T3 and T4
coupled cluster amplitudes, required in externally cor-
rected CCSD 141 where the DMRG wavefunction is the
external source. 140 For this purpose, we use a much
smaller threshold for the CI coefficient, and an addi-
tional restriction on the excitation order (up to quadru-
ples) with respect to the Fermi vacuum to preserve the
polynomial complexity of the overall algorithm.
(iii) The same extraction algorithm can also be utilized
in a tailored CCSD 142,143 code using the DMRG wave-
function as the external source for extracting the T1 and
T2 coupled cluster amplitudes in the active space. 144,145
F. MPS transformations
In block2 the MPS may be converted between dif-
ferent representations suitable for different tasks. There
are some limitations on the operations supported in dif-
ferent MPS representations. Below, we discuss examples
of such MPS transformations.
1. Singlet embedding
A spin-adapted MPS with non-zero total spin can be
represented in either the singlet embedding (SE) 35,42,53
format (with additional non-interacting fictitious spins
added to the end of the DMRG lattice to create a singlet)
or the non-singlet-embedding (NSE) format.
For MPS expressed in the SE format, there is no accu-
racy loss when changing the canonical form between sites,
so the DMRG optimization process becomes more stable.
However, the SE MPS form makes it difficult to evaluate
certain quantities, such as the one-particle triplet transi-
tion density matrix (1-TTDM), 42 required in the 2-step
treatment of the SOC effect. 70 On the other hand, we
do not support the computation of CSF coefficients from
NSE MPS. To overcome these limitations, we have imple-
mented the exact transformation from SE to NSE MPS,
and from NSE to SE MPS. The user can perform the
optimization of MPS using either the SE or NSE format,
and then transform the MPS to the appropriate format
before computing the 1-TTDM or extracting CSF coeffi-
cients.
2. Orbital rotations
To improve the representation power of a given bond
dimension MPS in DMRG, it is sometimes desirable to
rotate the orbital basis.146 In block2 we use an exponen-
tial parametrization of the orbital rotation matrix,147 and
implement the orbital rotation as a time evolution. 31,105
As an example usage of this transformation, one can
perform DMRG optimization using a set of localized or-
bitals, and then compute the determinant coefficients de-
fined in a different set of orbitals after an MPS orbital
rotation.
As the MPS entanglement structure in two sets of or-
bitals can be significantly different, often the MPS orbital
rotation cannot be performed exactly. When a fixed bond
dimension and time step is used for the transformation,
the resulting MPS can sometimes be highly inaccurate.
We provide a few additional options to improve the ac-
curacy.
(i) When we want the orbital transformation to ap-
proximately preserve the orbital ordering, we use the
Kuhn-Munkres algorithm 148,149 to first match the old
and new orbitals.
(ii) We can remove some artificial rotations in the log-
arithm of the rotation matrix by forcing all leading prin-
cipal minors of the rotation matrix to be non-negative.
3. Symmetry mappings
As described earlier, block2 supports many kinds of
symmetries in the DMRG calculations. We also provide
the ability to transform MPS from a higher to a lower
symmetry group. For example:
(i) We can transform spin-adapted (SA) MPS 35,39,41
to non-spin-adapted (NSA) MPS. This can be done ex-
actly, and the bond dimension of the transformed NSA
MPS will generally be higher than that of the SA MPS.35
Since the DMRG optimization of the SA MPS is often
much cheaper, this can be useful when the analysis has to
be performed on the NSA MPS (for example, when infor-
mation on the determinant expansion is desired). When
the SA MPS is not a singlet, the user can additionally set
the desired projected spin of the transformed NSA MPS,
and the transformed MPS will have both well-defined to-
tal and projected spin.
(ii) We can transform from an MPS expressed in one
point group to a subgroup. To perform such a trans-
formation, the user must provide a mapping between the
irreducible representations in the two groups. In block2
we implement this type of MPS symmetry mapping us-
ing a fitting approach, where a small fitting error can be
expected.
11
G. DMRG for dynamical and time-dependent quantities
block2 supports a full suite of algorithms to compute
dynamical quantities, such as Green’s functions, as well
as to perform time-dependent state propagation.
1. Dynamical DMRG
Dynamical DMRG (DDMRG) is the original extension
of the standard DMRG algorithm to compute dynamical
quantities, such as Green’s functions and other spectro-
scopic quantities32,105,150–152 [we will use the electron re-
moval (IP) part of one-particle Green’s function in the
examples below]. In block2, we provide an improved
version of dynamical DMRG called DDMRG ++, intro-
duced in Ref. 105. We provide the following options for
this method.
(i) We can solve the response equations to find the cor-
rection vector as an MPS, and the IP one-particle Green’s
function is obtained as the expectation value
G−
ij(ω) := ⟨Ψ0|a†
j|Ψ′
i(ω)⟩ (8)
[ ˆH0 − E0 + ω − iη]|Ψ′
i(ω)⟩ = ai|Ψ0⟩ (9)
where |Ψ0⟩ and E0 are the (assumed real) ground state
MPS and energy, |Ψ′
i(ω)⟩ is the correction vector MPS,
G−
ij(ω) is the IP part of one-particle Green’s function, and
ω and η are the real frequency and broadening factor,
respectively. In general, |Ψ′
i(ω)⟩ will be complex, and
we solve this equation in the complex domain using the
DDMRG++ sweep algorithm.
(ii) Alternatively, we write the correction vector as
|Ψ′
i(ω)⟩ := |Xi(ω)⟩ + i|Yi(ω)⟩ and Eq. (9) becomes 32,105
  ˆH0 − E0 + ω
2
+ η2
|Yi(ω)⟩ = ηai|Ψ0⟩ (10)
In block2 we also use DDMRG ++ to solve the above
equation in the real domain.
(iii) For very small η, both Eq. (9) and Eq. (10) will
become ill-conditioned for some ω, and the required num-
ber of CG or GCROT118 iterations at each site during the
sweep can become large. 153 To accelerate the computa-
tion of the DMRG Green’s function, we support a multi-
grid frequency strategy. At the coarse-grained level, we
use a large η0 and a coarse grid of ω0 for the DDMRG
sweeps. At the fine-grained level, we solve Eq. (9) or
Eq. (10) using a smaller η only in the middle site in the
sweep, for a few ω near the ω0 value. This method as-
sumes that the renormalized basis in the correction vec-
tor MPS generated at ω0 with a large broadening can be
reused for adjacent frequencies. Using this strategy, we
can often achieve a good balance between accuracy and
efficiency.
2. Chebyshev DMRG
To avoid solving the ill-conditioned response equation
in DDMRG, we have also implemented the Chebyshev
DMRG approach,154–157 based on the Chebyshev expan-
sion of the resolvent and the MPS representation of the
Chebyshev vectors.
3. Time-dependent DMRG
block2 implements time-dependent DMRG (td-
DMRG) for true non-equilibrium dynamics, as well as
to simulate linear spectra (via the Fourier transform of
the autocorrelation function).
(i) We support both imaginary time evolution (ITE)
and real time evolution (RTE). When the Hamiltonian is
real (and the initial state is real) ITE can be performed
using only real arithmetic, while RTE can be carried
out in hybrid real-and-complex mode, where the MPO
and rotation matrices in the MPS are represented as real
objects, and the MPS tensor at the canonical center is
complex. Alternatively, one can perform time evolution
where both MPO and MPS are complex and the time
step can also be a complex number.
(ii) For the sweep algorithm used in td-DMRG, we
implemented both the time-step targeting (TST)
approach31 and the time-dependent variational
principle151,158–161 approach. For the TST approach,
we support both the td-DMRG and td-DMRG ++105
variants. The Hamiltonian involved in these algorithms
can be Hermitian or non-Hermitian (the latter appears
when time evolution is used to perform orbital rotation).
Fig. 6 shows a numerical example using time-
dependent DMRG.
H. Finite-temperature DMRG
block2 supports several finite-temperature DMRG al-
gorithms.
1. Ancilla approach
In the ancilla approach for finite temperature, 28 we
perform imaginary time evolution of a purified thermal
state in an enlarged Hilbert space. Within the context of
DMRG, we represent the purified state as an MPS, where
ancilla sites are added as a bath. In block2 we provide
subroutines to create the initial finite-temperature MPS
at inverse temperature β = 0 and the finite-temperature
MPO, which is a normal MPO decorated with identity
operators at the ancilla sites. We support the evaluation
of free energies and PDMs of the finite-temperature MPS
by tracing out the ancilla sites. The finite-temperature
variants of dynamical DMRG 163 and time-dependent
12
0 5 10 15 20 25
Time t
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4Current J(t)/V
Time-dependent DMRG
H = Hdot + Hleads
Single-impurity Anderson model
FIG. 6. Current as a function of time for the single impurity
Anderson model with U = 0.5t, t′ = 0.3535t, V = 2U, Vg =
−0.5U and 48 sites, simulated using time-dependent DMRG
with the time-dependent variational principle approach, time
step ∆t = 0.025, and MPS bond dimension M = 1000. (The
curve is chosen to illustrate dynamics rather than full conver-
gence with respect to all parameters.) Model parameters are
taken from Ref. 162.
DMRG164,165 are also available to compute dynamical
quantities.
Fig. 7 shows a numerical example of the finite-
temperature DMRG using the ancilla approach.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Temperature T
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9Electronic energy E(T)
Finite temperature DMRG (ancilla approach)
H =
k
|k|2
2 ak ak + 1
2
k 0, k1, k2
ak1 + kak2 kak2ak1
3D Uniform Electron Gas
FIG. 7. Electronic energy at different temperatures for the
three dimensional uniform electron gas model 166 with den-
sity rs = 4, box length L = 10.24, and plane wave basis set
kinetic energy cutoff Ecut = 0 .6199, simulated using finite-
temperature DMRG with the ancilla approach28 and RK4 for
imaginary time evolution,31 at chemical potential µ = −2.
2. Sum-over-states approach
To compute properties at very low temperatures
(namely, when β is large), the ancilla approach can be
inefficient since a large number of time steps is required
and this can also generate large entanglement between
the physical and ancillary degrees of freedom. We instead
perform time-independent DMRG to find a few low-lying
eigenstates, and the finite-temperature effects are then
computed through a partition function sum over these
states. Since the low-lying states can have different parti-
cle numbers and spins, we can either represent them using
a single particle-number-non-conserving state-averaged
MPS, so that the required number of states in each sym-
metry sector can be determined automatically, or by us-
ing multiple state-averaged MPSs to cover all symmetry
sectors. The latter scheme may be more efficient, but re-
quires the knowledge of the number of low-energy states
in each symmetry sector.
I. DMRG and dynamical correlation
When simulating realistic chemical problems, the num-
ber of correlated orbitals can quickly exceed the capa-
bilities of the standard DMRG algorithm for quantum
chemistry. Thus it is necessary to combine DMRG with
other ideas to treat both static and dynamic correlation
effects.26,27,128,135,167–174 In the following we list a few
different dynamical correlation treatments implemented
in block2.
1. Perturbative DMRG
In perturbative DMRG,175 the energy of a small bond
dimension variational DMRG calculation is corrected us-
ing second-order perturbation theory, where the Hamilto-
nian is partitioned similarly to the Epstein-Nesbet par-
titioning. In block2, we include two implementations
of this method (for both non-spin-adapted DMRG and
spin-adapted DMRG).
(i) In the deterministic perturbative DMRG
approach,175 the first-order perturbative wavefunc-
tion is represented as an MPS, which is optimized by
solving the response equation using dynamical DMRG
(without frequency).
(ii) In the stochastic perturbative DMRG approach,106
we first compress the first-order wavefunction to a low
bond dimension MPS, then the second-order energy cor-
rection is evaluated by determinant or CSF sampling.
2. Uncontracted dynamical correlation theories
It is natural to add dynamical correlation to DMRG
in the framework of multireference theories, where the
DMRG-CASSCF solution is used as a reference state,
13
and low-order excitations from this space are used for
the dynamic correlation treatment. We can represent
the wavefunction ansatz (including the active, core, and
virtual sub-spaces) as an MPS that approximates an un-
contracted correlation ansatz. 115,176 As introduced in a
recent report,58 we provide a few different implementa-
tions to represent and optimize MPS for uncontracted
dynamical correlation theories.
(i) We can construct a conventional MPS that de-
scribes all the orbital spaces, but restrict the quantum
numbers to limit the excitation order out of the ac-
tive space. 58 This approach can be trivially supported
in block2, so it is automatically compatible with many
other features. However, its efficiency can be low. When
the excitation order is restricted to singles, we provide
an accelerated solver that bypasses the sweep iterations
over the external orbitals.177
(ii) For improved efficiency, we can introduce two large
sites in the MPS to describe the core and virtual spaces
so that operations on these orbitals can be handled
specially.58 In block2, we support several different treat-
ments of the large site. The CSF and determinant based
large-site implementation provides the highest efficiency,
for the spin-adapted and non-spin-adapted cases, respec-
tively. We also support building a large-site MPO tensor
by contracting normal MPO tensors, which is less effi-
cient.
Using the large-site scheme, we can optimize the
MPS energy for different multireference theories (with
large active spaces and many core orbitals), 58 includ-
ing arbitrary-order multi-reference configuration inter-
action (MRCI)58,178 and size-extensivity corrections, 167
arbitrary-order averaged quadratic coupled cluster
(AQCC),179 arbitrary-order coupled pair functional
(ACPF),180 and arbitrary-order NEVPT 136,181,182 and
restraining the excitation degree multireference pertur-
bation theory (MRREPT). 170,183,184Our flexible imple-
mentation further allows for the inclusion of arbitrary
determinants/CSFs in a fashion similar to selected con-
figuration interaction.
3. Internally contracted dynamical correlations
Internally contracted dynamical correlation theories
form a second common framework for multireference
correlation. When the active space indices in the ex-
citation operator are also contracted, the correspond-
ing theories are called strongly-contracted. 81,135,185 Cur-
rently we provide the spin-free implementations of fully
internally contracted MRCI singles and doubles (FIC-
MRCISD),128,130 internally contracted NEVPT2,177 and
strongly contracted NEVPT2 135 using automatic sym-
bolic expression derivation and DMRG N-PDMs imple-
mented in block2. Other internally contracted theo-
ries are supported via the interface between block2 and
some external packages, which will be discussed in the
next section.
Fig. 8 shows a numerical example of the performance
of theories for DMRG with dynamical correlations.
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
Energy error |E EDMRG| (Hartree)
 (a)
Perturbative DMRG
Uncontracted NEVPT2
Uncontracted MRREPT2
Uncontracted MRCISD
2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
C C bond length (Å)
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
Energy error |E EDMRG| (Hartree)
 (b)
Strongly contracted NEVPT2
Internally contracted NEVPT2
Internally contracted MRREPT2
Fully internally contracted MRCISD
C C
FIG. 8. A comparison between absolute energies computed
using DMRG (with MPS bond dimension M = 3000) and
(a) perturbative DMRG and uncontracted and (b) internally
contracted dynamic correlation multi-reference theories im-
plemented in block2, for carbon dimer in the cc-pVDZ basis
set at different bond lengths. DMRG-CASSCF with a active
space (8o, 8e) is performed to generate the reference state for
MRCISD, NEVPT2, and MRREPT2. The reference state for
perturbative DMRG is an MPS with M = 200.
III. INTERFACES AND EXTENSIONS
To extend the range of application of DMRG algo-
rithms, we have designed block2 to be interoperable
with other libraries. In this section, we list some of the
available basic interfaces of block2, as well as the inter-
faces between block2 and external packages.
14
A. Basic interfaces to block2
The source code of block2 is mainly written in
C++11, as a header-only library. We use templates ex-
tensively for a concise treatment of different symmetry
classes and floating point number types. The code can
be compiled using GNU gcc, clang, Apple clang, Intel
icc, or the msvc compilers, and supports the Linux, Ma-
cOS, and Windows platforms. For MacOS we support
both the x86 and arm64 instruction architectures. Cur-
rently, development and testing focus on the Linux (x86)
and MacOS (x86) platforms. We currently provide the
following basic interfaces to block2.
(i) A Python library interface to block2 and pyblock2
(not to be confused with pyblock3). The former ex-
poses almost all C++ classes and functions to Python
using pybind11.186 The latter provides some helper and
driver classes written in pure Python, for users to easily
customize their workflow.
(ii) The Python script block2main for parsing input
files and running DMRG. This provides a simple inter-
face which should be familiar to users of conventional
quantum chemistry packages. The input file format is
also compatible with that of StackBlock,60 so existing
applications that call StackBlock as an executable can
be directly used with block2. A list of the supported
keywords is given in the documentation.
(iii) A C++ executable block2 to parse input files
and run DMRG. We have found this interface to be use-
ful when performing very large scale distributed parallel
computations, where the Python components can induce
significant overheads.
(iv) The C++ library libblock2.so, which can be
used together with other packages written in C++. In
principle, one can also simply includeblock2 header files
in a C++ project without linking to the library. How-
ever, in practice this may introduce unnecessary extra
compilation time.
Besides providing freely downloadable source code, 45
we also provide precompiled packages for the Python
interfaces, which can be installed using pip install
block2 [without the Message Passing Interface (MPI)
library dependence] or pip install block2-mpi (with
MPI dependence).
B. Extension interfaces to external packages
We provide the following interfaces to external pack-
ages to extend the functionality of block2.
(i) PySCF.49,50 The orbitals and integrals required
for running DMRG can be computed using mean-field
methods implemented in PySCF. One can also per-
form DMRG-CASSCF (energy and gradients),92 DMRG
SC-NEVPT2 (using the exact 4-PDM 135 or MPS
compression81) with PySCF and block2 (this par-
tially reuses the existing PySCF interface to Stack-
Block, which gives an alternative implementation of
SC-NEVPT2 to the native implementation in block2).
Using the Python interface to the block2 symbolic en-
gine and some of the PySCF infrastructure, one can also
automatically derive and implement a variety of coupled
cluster theories.
(ii) LibDMET.187 One can use ground state or finite
temperature DMRG as the impurity solver188 for ab ini-
tio Density Matrix Embedding Theory (DMET) through
the interface betweenblock2 and LibDMET.189 In par-
ticular, the ab initio DMRG with general spin orbitals
was implemented as an impurity solver for the supercon-
ducting Hamiltonian.190
(iii) fcdmft.191,192 One can use dynamical DMRG or
DMRG uncontracted MRCI as the impurity solver for ab
initio full cell Dynamical Mean-Field Theory (DMFT)
using block2 with fcdmft.
(iv) StackBlock.35,60 We provide scripts to trans-
form MPSs (in both directions) between StackBlock
and block2. This is primarily useful for benchmarking
purposes.
(v) PyBlock3.122 We provide scripts to transform
MPSs and MPOs in both directions between PyBlock3
and block2.
(vi) OpenMolcas.193 We can perform DMRG-
CASSCF and DMRG-CASPT2 169,194–196 (with or with-
out cumulant approximations 197) using OpenMolcas
and block2. This is implemented using a small mod-
ification to the existing interface between OpenMolcas
and StackBlock.198
(vii) Forte.199 One can perform DMRG-CASCI,
DMRG-CASSCF, and DMRG-Driven-Similarity-
Renormalization-Group (DSRG) 174 with the interface
between Forte and block2.
(viii) Qiskit.200 Through the Python interface in
block2 one can perform fermionic or spin DMRG for
Hamiltonian expressions generated in Qiskit. For exam-
ple, one can perform fermionic DMRG from the Qiskit
second quantized Hamiltonian expression, or DMRG
for Hamiltonians expressed as linear combinations of
arbitrary-length Pauli strings.84
As suggested by these examples, it is also simple to
extend block2 interfaces to work with many other pack-
ages.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
After more than three years of development, the ro-
bustness, utility, and comprehensiveness of the block2
framework has been examined and tested across a great
variety of projects. In our experience, the range of im-
plementations and algorithms provided by block2 has
allowed DMRG to be fruitfully applied for many different
purposes, ranging from benchmarking other methods, to
obtaining high-accuracy definitive results inab initioand
model simulations. Moving forwards, we will continue to
develop block2 as an open framework for DMRG algo-
rithms and to further extend its integration with other
15
packages. We hope that block2 will serve as platform to
extend DMRG to new domains and to generate insights
into new scientific areas.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
H.Z. thanks Sandeep Sharma for helpful discussions.
This framework was produced over several years with
contributions from multiple individuals. Work by H.Z.
was supported by the US National Science Foundation,
under Award No. CHE-2102505. Work by H.R.L. and
T.Z. was supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific
Research, under Award FA9550-18-1-0095. H.R.L. ac-
knowledges support from a postdoctoral fellowship from
the German Research Foundation (DFG) via grant LA
4442/1-1 during the first part of this work. Work by
S.L. (this material) was supported by the US Depart-
ment of Energy, Office of Science, National Quantum In-
formation Science Research Centers, Quantum Systems
Accelerator. Work by Z.C. was supported by the US De-
partment of Energy, Office of Science, under Award No.
DE-SC0018140. Work by C.S. was supported by the US
Department of Energy, Office of Science, under Grant
No. DE-SC0019374. Work by L.P. was supported by
the US Department of Energy, Office of Science, via the
M2QM EFRC under Grant No. DE-SC0019330. Work
by R.P. was supported by the US National Science Foun-
dation, under Award No. CHE-2102505. Work by K.L.
was supported by the US Department of Energy, Of-
fice of Science, Basic Energy Sciences and Office of Ad-
vanced Scientific Computing Research, Scientific Discov-
ery through Advanced Computing (SciDAC) program,
under Award No. DE-SC0022088. Work by J.T. was
supported by the US Department of Energy, Office of
Science, under Award No. DE-SC0018140. J.T. acknowl-
edges funding through a postdoctoral research fellowship
from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, Ger-
man Research Foundation)-495279997. Work by J.Y. was
supported by the US Department of Energy, Office of
Science, via the M2QM EFRC under Grant No. DE-
SC0019330. The computations presented in this work
were conducted at the Resnick High Performance Com-
puting Center, a facility supported by the Resnick Sus-
tainability Institute at the California Institute of Tech-
nology.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The reference input and output files for produc-
ing data in the numerical examples can be found in
the GitHub repository https://github.com/hczhai/
block2-example-data. The reference software version
is block2 0.5.2.
1White, S. R. Density matrix formulation for quantum renormal-
ization groups. Physical Review Letters 1992, 69, 2863.
2White, S. R. Density-matrix algorithms for quantum renormal-
ization groups. Physical Review B 1993, 48, 10345.
3Verstraete, F.; Nishino, T.; Schollw¨ ock, U.; Ba˜ nuls, M. C.;
Chan, G. K.-L.; Stoudenmire, M. E. Density matrix renormal-
ization group, 30 years on. Nature Reviews Physics 2023, 1–4.
4Hachmann, J.; Cardoen, W.; Chan, G. K.-L. Multireference cor-
relation in long molecules with the quadratic scaling density ma-
trix renormalization group. The Journal of Chemical Physics
2006, 125, 144101–144101.
5Singh, S.; Zhou, H.-Q.; Vidal, G. Simulation of one-dimensional
quantum systems with a global SU(2) symmetry. New Journal
of Physics 2010, 12, 033029.
6LeBlanc, J. P.; Antipov, A. E.; Becca, F.; Bulik, I. W.; Chan, G.
K.-L.; Chung, C.-M.; Deng, Y.; Ferrero, M.; Henderson, T. M.;
Jim´ enez-Hoyos, C. A., et al. Solutions of the two-dimensional
Hubbard model: Benchmarks and results from a wide range of
numerical algorithms. Physical Review X 2015, 5, 041041.
7Motta, M.; Ceperley, D. M.; Chan, G. K.-L.; Gomez, J. A.;
Gull, E.; Guo, S.; Jim´ enez-Hoyos, C. A.; Lan, T. N.; Li, J.;
Ma, F., et al. Towards the solution of the many-electron problem
in real materials: Equation of state of the hydrogen chain with
state-of-the-art many-body methods. Physical Review X 2017,
7, 031059.
8Motta, M.; Genovese, C.; Ma, F.; Cui, Z.-H.; Sawaya, R.;
Chan, G. K.-L.; Chepiga, N.; Helms, P.; Jim´ enez-Hoyos, C.;
Millis, A. J., et al. Ground-state properties of the hydrogen
chain: dimerization, insulator-to-metal transition, and magnetic
phases. Physical Review X 2020, 10, 031058.
9Hachmann, J.; Dorando, J. J.; Avil´ es, M.; Chan, G. K.-L. The
radical character of the acenes: A density matrix renormaliza-
tion group study. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2007, 127,
134309.
10Marti, K. H.; Ondik, I. M.; Moritz, G.; Reiher, M. Density ma-
trix renormalization group calculations on relative energies of
transition metal complexes and clusters. The Journal of Chem-
ical Physics 2008, 128, 014104–014104.
11Kurashige, Y.; Yanai, T. High-performance ab initio density ma-
trix renormalization group method: Applicability to large-scale
multireference problems for metal compounds. The Journal of
Chemical Physics 2009, 130, 234114–234114.
12Mizukami, W.; Kurashige, Y.; Yanai, T. Communication: Novel
quantum states of electron spins in polycarbenes from ab initio
density matrix renormalization group calculations. The Journal
of Chemical Physics 2010, 133, 091101.
13Kurashige, Y.; Chan, G. K.-L.; Yanai, T. Entangled quantum
electronic wavefunctions of the Mn 4CaO5 cluster in photosys-
tem II. Nature Chemistry 2013, 5, 660–666.
14Harris, T. V.; Kurashige, Y.; Yanai, T.; Morokuma, K. Ab ini-
tio density matrix renormalization group study of magnetic cou-
pling in dinuclear iron and chromium complexes. The Journal
of Chemical Physics 2014, 140, 054303.
15Sharma, S.; Sivalingam, K.; Neese, F.; Chan, G. K.-L. Low-
energy spectrum of iron–sulfur clusters directly from many-
particle quantum mechanics. Nature Chemistry 2014, 6, 927–
933.
16Chalupsky, J.; Rokob, T. A.; Kurashige, Y.; Yanai, T.;
Solomon, E. I.; Rulisek, L.; Srnec, M. Reactivity of the bin-
uclear non-heme iron active site of ∆ 9 desaturase studied by
large-scale multireference ab initio calculations. Journal of the
American Chemical Society 2014, 136, 15977–15991.
17Li, Z.; Guo, S.; Sun, Q.; Chan, G. K.-L. Electronic landscape of
the P-cluster of nitrogenase as revealed through many-electron
quantum wavefunction simulations. Nature Chemistry 2019,
11, 1026–1033.
18Larsson, H. R.; Zhai, H.; Umrigar, C. J.; Chan, G. K.-L. The
chromium dimer: closing a chapter of quantum chemistry.Jour-
nal of the American Chemical Society 2022, 144, 15932–15937.
19Frahm, L.-H.; Pfannkuche, D. Ultrafast ab initio quantum
chemistry using matrix product states. Journal of Chemical
Theory and Computation 2019, 15, 2154–2165.
16
20Baiardi, A. Electron dynamics with the time-dependent density
matrix renormalization group. Journal of Chemical Theory and
Computation 2021, 17, 3320–3334.
21Li, Z.; Li, J.; Dattani, N. S.; Umrigar, C.; Chan, G. K.-L. The
electronic complexity of the ground-state of the FeMo cofactor
of nitrogenase as relevant to quantum simulations. The Journal
of chemical physics 2019, 150, 024302.
22Lee, S.; Lee, J.; Zhai, H.; Tong, Y.; Dalzell, A. M.; Kumar, A.;
Helms, P.; Gray, J.; Cui, Z.-H.; Liu, W., et al. Evaluating the
evidence for exponential quantum advantage in ground-state
quantum chemistry. Nature Communications 2023, 14, 1952.
23Chan, G. K.-L.; Sharma, S. The density matrix renormaliza-
tion group in quantum chemistry. Annual Review of Physical
Chemistry 2011, 62, 465–481.
24Wouters, S.; Van Neck, D. The density matrix renormalization
group for ab initio quantum chemistry. The European Physical
Journal D 2014, 68, 1–20.
25Baiardi, A.; Reiher, M. The density matrix renormalization
group in chemistry and molecular physics: Recent developments
and new challenges. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2020,
152, 040903.
26Yanai, T.; Kurashige, Y.; Mizukami, W.; Chalupsk` y, J.;
Lan, T. N.; Saitow, M. Density matrix renormalization group
for ab initio Calculations and associated dynamic correlation
methods: A review of theory and applications. International
Journal of Quantum Chemistry 2015, 115, 283–299.
27Cheng, Y.; Xie, Z.; Ma, H. Post-density matrix renormalization
group methods for describing dynamic electron correlation with
large active spaces. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters
2022, 13, 904–915.
28Feiguin, A. E.; White, S. R. Finite-temperature density matrix
renormalization using an enlarged Hilbert space. Physical Re-
view B 2005, 72, 220401.
29Stoudenmire, E.; White, S. R. Minimally entangled typical ther-
mal state algorithms. New Journal of Physics 2010, 12, 055026.
30Roemelt, M. Spin orbit coupling for molecular ab initio density
matrix renormalization group calculations: Application to g-
tensors. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2015, 143, 044112.
31Feiguin, A. E.; White, S. R. Time-step targeting methods for
real-time dynamics using the density matrix renormalization
group. Physical Review B 2005, 72, 020404.
32Jeckelmann, E. Dynamical density-matrix renormalization-
group method. Physical Review B 2002, 66, 045114.
33Fishman, M.; White, S.; Stoudenmire, E. The ITensor software
library for tensor network calculations. SciPost Physics Code-
bases 2022, 004.
34Chan, G. K.-L.; Head-Gordon, M. Highly correlated calculations
with a polynomial cost algorithm: A study of the density matrix
renormalization group. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2002,
116, 4462–4476.
35Sharma, S.; Chan, K.-L. Spin-adapted density matrix renormal-
ization group algorithms for quantum chemistry.The Journal of
Chemical Physics 2012, 136, 124121–124121.
36Legeza, ¨O.; R¨ oder, J.; Hess, B. Controlling the accuracy of the
density-matrix renormalization-group method: The dynamical
block state selection approach. Physical Review B 2003, 67,
125114.
37Boguslawski, K.; Tecmer, P.; Barcza, G.; Legeza, O.; Reiher, M.
Orbital entanglement in bond-formation processes. Journal of
Chemical Theory and Computation 2013, 9, 2959–2973.
38Luo, H.-G.; Qin, M.-P.; Xiang, T. Optimizing Hartree-Fock or-
bitals by the density-matrix renormalization group.Physical Re-
view B 2010, 81, 235129.
39Wouters, S.; Poelmans, W.; Ayers, P. W.; Van Neck, D.
CheMPS2: A free open-source spin-adapted implementation of
the density matrix renormalization group for ab initio quan-
tum chemistry. Computer Physics Communications 2014, 185,
1501–1514.
40Keller, S.; Dolfi, M.; Troyer, M.; Reiher, M. An efficient ma-
trix product operator representation of the quantum chemi-
cal Hamiltonian. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2015, 143,
244118.
41Keller, S.; Reiher, M. Spin-adapted matrix product states and
operators. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2016, 144, 134101.
42Li, Z.; Chan, G. K.-L. Spin-projected matrix product states:
Versatile tool for strongly correlated systems. Journal of Chem-
ical Theory and Computation 2017, 13, 2681–2695.
43Brabec, J.; Brandejs, J.; Kowalski, K.; Xantheas, S.; Leg-
eza, ¨O.; Veis, L. Massively parallel quantum chemical density
matrix renormalization group method. Journal of Computa-
tional Chemistry 2021, 42, 534–544.
44Xie, Z.; Song, Y.; Peng, F.; Li, J.; Cheng, Y.; Zhang, L.; Ma, Y.;
Tian, Y.; Luo, Z.; Ma, H. Kylin 1.0: An ab-initio density matrix
renormalization group quantum chemistry program. Journal of
Computational Chemistry 2023, 44, 1316–1328.
45Zhai, H.; Larsson, H. R.; Lee, S.; Cui, Z.-H. block2: Effi-
cient MPO implementation of quantum chemistry DMRG. 2023;
https://github.com/block-hczhai/block2-preview.
46Zgid, D.; Nooijen, M. On the spin and symmetry adaptation of
the density matrix renormalization group method. The Journal
of Chemical Physics 2008, 128, 014107.
47Sharma, S. A general non-Abelian density matrix renormaliza-
tion group algorithm with application to the C2 dimer. The
Journal of Chemical Physics 2015, 142, 024107.
48Li, Z. Time-reversal symmetry adaptation in relativistic density
matrix renormalization group algorithm. The Journal of Chem-
ical Physics 2023, 158, 044119.
49Sun, Q.; Berkelbach, T. C.; Blunt, N. S.; Booth, G. H.; Guo, S.;
Li, Z.; Liu, J.; McClain, J. D.; Sayfutyarova, E. R.; Sharma, S.,
et al. PySCF: the Python-based simulations of chemistry frame-
work. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Molecu-
lar Science 2018, 8, e1340.
50Sun, Q.; Zhang, X.; Banerjee, S.; Bao, P.; Barbry, M.;
Blunt, N. S.; Bogdanov, N. A.; Booth, G. H.; Chen, J.;
Cui, Z. H., et al. Recent developments in the P y SCF program
package. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2020, 153, 024109.
51Xiang, T. Density-matrix renormalization-group method in mo-
mentum space. Physical Review B 1996, 53, R10445.
52Zhang, S. SO(4) symmetry of the Hubbard model and its exper-
imental consequences. International Journal of Modern Physics
B 1991, 5, 153–168.
53McCulloch, I. P.; Gul´ acsi, M. The non-Abelian density matrix
renormalization group algorithm. Europhysics Letters 2002, 57,
852.
54Xiang, C.; Jia, W.; Fang, W.-H.; Li, Z. A distributed multi-
GPU ab initio density matrix renormalization group algorithm
with applications to the P-cluster of nitrogenase. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.02854 2023,
55Zhai, H.; Lee, S.; Cui, Z.-H.; Cao, L.; Ryde, U.; Chan, G. K.-L.
Multireference protonation energetics of a dimeric model of ni-
trogenase iron-sulfur clusters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07227
2023,
56White, S. R. Density matrix renormalization group algorithms
with a single center site. Physical Review B 2005, 72, 180403.
57Hubig, C.; McCulloch, I. P.; Schollw¨ ock, U.; Wolf, F. A. Strictly
single-site DMRG algorithm with subspace expansion. Physical
Review B 2015, 91, 155115.
58Larsson, H. R.; Zhai, H.; Gunst, K.; Chan, G. K.-L. Matrix
product states with large sites. Journal of Chemical Theory and
Computation 2022, 18, 749–762.
59Dorando, J. J.; Hachmann, J.; Chan, G. K.-L. Targeted excited
state algorithms. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2007, 127,
084109.
60Sharma, S.; Chan, G. K.-L. block: the density matrix renormal-
ization group (DMRG) algorithm for quantum chemistry. 2012;
https://github.com/sanshar/StackBlock.
61Larsson, H. R. Computing vibrational eigenstates with tree ten-
sor network states (TTNS). The Journal of Chemical Physics
2019, 151, 204102.
17
62Li, Z.; Xiao, Y.; Liu, W. On the spin separation of algebraic
two-component relativistic Hamiltonians: Molecular properties.
The Journal of Chemical Physics 2014, 141, 054111.
63Moritz, G.; Wolf, A.; Reiher, M. Relativistic DMRG calcula-
tions on the curve crossing of cesium hydride. The Journal of
Chemical Physics 2005, 123, 184105.
64Knecht, S.; Legeza, ¨O.; Reiher, M. Communication: Four-
component density matrix renormalization group. The Journal
of Chemical Physics 2014, 140, 041101.
65Battaglia, S.; Keller, S.; Knecht, S. Efficient relativistic density-
matrix renormalization group implementation in a matrix-
product formulation. Journal of Chemical Theory and Com-
putation 2018, 14, 2353–2369.
66Hoyer, C. E.; Hu, H.; Lu, L.; Knecht, S.; Li, X. Relativis-
tic Kramers-unrestricted exact-two-component density matrix
renormalization group. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A
2022, 126, 5011–5020.
67Dyall, K. G.; Fægri Jr, K. Introduction to relativistic quantum
chemistry; Oxford University Press, 2007.
68Zhai, H.; Chan, G. K.-L. A comparison between the one-and
two-step spin–orbit coupling approaches based on the ab initio
density matrix renormalization group. The Journal of Chemical
Physics 2022, 157, 164108.
69Neese, F. Efficient and accurate approximations to the molecu-
lar spin-orbit coupling operator and their use in molecular g-
tensor calculations. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2005,
122, 034107.
70Sayfutyarova, E. R.; Chan, G. K.-L. A state interaction spin-
orbit coupling density matrix renormalization group method.
The Journal of Chemical Physics 2016, 144, 234301.
71Sayfutyarova, E.; Chan, G. K.-L. Electron paramagnetic reso-
nance g-tensors from state interaction spin-orbit coupling den-
sity matrix renormalization group. The Journal of Chemical
Physics 2018, 148, 184103–184103.
72Chan, G. K.-L.; Van Voorhis, T. Density-matrix
renormalization-group algorithms with nonorthogonal or-
bitals and non-Hermitian operators, and applications to
polyenes. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2005, 122, 204101.
73White, S. R. Numerical canonical transformation approach
to quantum many-body problems. The Journal of Chemical
Physics 2002, 117, 7472–7482.
74Yanai, T.; Chan, G. K.-L. Canonical transformation theory
for multireference problems. The Journal of Chemical Physics
2006, 124, 194106.
75Neuscamman, E.; Yanai, T.; Chan, G. K.-L. Strongly con-
tracted canonical transformation theory. The Journal of Chem-
ical Physics 2010, 132, 024106.
76Yanai, T.; Kurashige, Y.; Neuscamman, E.; Chan, G. K.-L. Ex-
tended implementation of canonical transformation theory: par-
allelization and a new level-shifted condition. Physical Chem-
istry Chemical Physics 2012, 14, 7809–7820.
77Bartlett, R. J.; Musia l, M. Coupled-cluster theory in quantum
chemistry. Reviews of Modern Physics 2007, 79, 291.
78Mitrushenkov, A.; Fano, G.; Linguerri, R.; Palmieri, P. On the
possibility to use non-orthogonal orbitals for Density Matrix
Renormalization Group calculations in Quantum Chemistry.
arXiv preprint arXiv:cond-mat/0306058 2003,
79Liao, K.; Zhai, H.; Christlmaier, E. M.; Schraivogel, T.;
R´ ıos, P. L.; Kats, D.; Alavi, A. Density Matrix Renormalization
Group for Transcorrelated Hamiltonians: Ground and Excited
States in Molecules. Journal of Chemical Theory and Compu-
tation 2023, 19, 1734–1743.
80Baiardi, A.; Reiher, M. Transcorrelated density matrix renor-
malization group. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2020, 153,
164115.
81Sokolov, A. Y.; Guo, S.; Ronca, E.; Chan, G. K.-L. Time-
dependent N-electron valence perturbation theory with matrix
product state reference wavefunctions for large active spaces and
basis sets: Applications to the chromium dimer and all-trans
polyenes. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2017, 146, 244102.
82Moritz, G.; Hess, B. A.; Reiher, M. Convergence behavior of the
density-matrix renormalization group algorithm for optimized
orbital orderings. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2005, 122,
024107.
83Ma, Y.; Ma, H. Assessment of various natural orbitals as
the basis of large active space density-matrix renormalization
group calculations. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2013, 138,
224105.
84Mishmash, R. V.; Gujarati, T. P.; Motta, M.; Zhai, H.; Chan, G.
K.-L.; Mezzacapo, A. Hierarchical Clifford Transformations to
Reduce Entanglement in Quantum Chemistry Wave Functions.
Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2023, 19, 3194–
3208.
85Fiedler, M. A property of eigenvectors of nonnegative symmet-
ric matrices and its application to graph theory. Czechoslovak
Mathematical Journal 1975, 25, 619–633.
86Barcza, G.; Legeza, ¨O.; Marti, K. H.; Reiher, M. Quantum-
information analysis of electronic states of different molecular
structures. Physical Review A 2011, 83, 012508.
87Olivares-Amaya, R.; Hu, W.; Nakatani, N.; Sharma, S.;
Yang, J.; Chan, G. K.-L. The ab-initio density matrix renor-
malization group in practice. The Journal of chemical physics
2015, 142, 034102.
88Rissler, J.; Noack, R. M.; White, S. R. Measuring orbital in-
teraction using quantum information theory. Chemical Physics
2006, 323, 519–531.
89Sun, Q.; Yang, J.; Chan, G. K.-L. A general second order com-
plete active space self-consistent-field solver for large-scale sys-
tems. Chemical Physics Letters 2017, 683, 291–299.
90Smith, J. E.; Lee, J.; Sharma, S. Near-exact nuclear gradients of
complete active space self-consistent field wave functions. The
Journal of Chemical Physics 2022, 157, 094104.
91Zgid, D.; Nooijen, M. The density matrix renormalization group
self-consistent field method: Orbital optimization with the den-
sity matrix renormalization group method in the active space.
The Journal of Chemical Physics 2008, 128, 144116.
92Ghosh, D.; Hachmann, J.; Yanai, T.; Chan, G. K.-L. Orbital
optimization in the density matrix renormalization group, with
applications to polyenes and β-carotene. The Journal of Chem-
ical Physics 2008, 128, 144117–144117.
93Yanai, T.; Kurashige, Y.; Ghosh, D.; Chan, G. K.-L. Accelerat-
ing convergence in iterative solution for large-scale complete ac-
tive space self-consistent-field calculations. International Jour-
nal of Quantum Chemistry 2009, 109, 2178–2190.
94Hu, W.; Chan, G. K.-L. Excited-state geometry optimization
with the density matrix renormalization group, as applied to
polyenes. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2015,
11, 3000–3009.
95Iino, T.; Shiozaki, T.; Yanai, T. Algorithm for analytic nu-
clear energy gradients of state averaged DMRG-CASSCF theory
with newly derived coupled-perturbed equations. The Journal
of Chemical Physics 2023, 158, 054107–054107.
96Zhai, H.; Chan, G. K.-L. Low communication high performance
ab initio density matrix renormalization group algorithms. The
Journal of Chemical Physics 2021, 154, 224116.
97Chan, G. K.-L.; Keselman, A.; Nakatani, N.; Li, Z.; White, S. R.
Matrix product operators, matrix product states, and ab initio
density matrix renormalization group algorithms. The Journal
of chemical physics 2016, 145, 014102.
98Stoudenmire, E.; White, S. R. Real-space parallel density matrix
renormalization group. Physical Review B 2013, 87, 155137.
99Chen, F.-Z.; Cheng, C.; Luo, H.-G. Real-space parallel density
matrix renormalization group with adaptive boundaries. Chi-
nese Physics B 2021, 30, 080202.
100Chan, G. K.-L. An algorithm for large scale density matrix
renormalization group calculations. The Journal of Chemical
Physics 2004, 120, 3172–3178.
101Levy, R.; Solomonik, E.; Clark, B. K. Distributed-memory
DMRG via sparse and dense parallel tensor contractions. SC20:
International Conference for High Performance Computing,
18
Networking, Storage and Analysis. 2020; pp 1–14.
102Hager, G.; Jeckelmann, E.; Fehske, H.; Wellein, G. Paralleliza-
tion strategies for density matrix renormalization group algo-
rithms on shared-memory systems. Journal of Computational
Physics 2004, 194, 795–808.
103Eriksen, J. J.; Anderson, T. A.; Deustua, J. E.; Ghanem, K.;
Hait, D.; Hoffmann, M. R.; Lee, S.; Levine, D. S.; Magoulas, I.;
Shen, J., et al. The ground state electronic energy of benzene.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2020, 11, 8922–
8929.
104Dunning Jr, T. H. Gaussian basis sets for use in correlated
molecular calculations. I. The atoms boron through neon and
hydrogen. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1989, 90, 1007–
1023.
105Ronca, E.; Li, Z.; Jimenez-Hoyos, C. A.; Chan, G. K.-L. Time-
step targeting time-dependent and dynamical density matrix
renormalization group algorithms with ab initio Hamiltonians.
Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2017, 13, 5560–
5571.
106Guo, S.; Li, Z.; Chan, G. K.-L. Communication: An efficient
stochastic algorithm for the perturbative density matrix renor-
malization group in large active spaces. The Journal of Chemi-
cal Physics 2018, 148, 221104.
107White, S. R.; Martin, R. L. Ab initio quantum chemistry us-
ing the density matrix renormalization group. The Journal of
Chemical Physics 1999, 110, 4127–4130.
108Jeckelmann, E.; White, S. R. Density-matrix renormalization-
group study of the polaron problem in the Holstein model.Phys-
ical Review B 1998, 57, 6376.
109Ge, Y.; Li, W.; Ren, J.; Shuai, Z. Computational Method for
Evaluating the Thermoelectric Power Factor for Organic Materi-
als Modeled by the Holstein Model: A Time-Dependent Density
Matrix Renormalization Group Formalism.Journal of Chemical
Theory and Computation 2022, 18, 6437–6446.
110Hubig, C.; McCulloch, I.; Schollw¨ ock, U. Generic construction
of efficient matrix product operators. Physical Review B 2017,
95, 035129.
111Ren, J.; Li, W.; Jiang, T.; Shuai, Z. A general automatic method
for optimal construction of matrix product operators using bi-
partite graph theory. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2020,
153, 084118.
112Stoudenmire, E. M.; White, S. R. Sliced basis density matrix
renormalization group for electronic structure. Physical Review
Letters 2017, 119, 046401.
113Lin, L.; Tong, Y. Low-rank representation of tensor network
operators with long-range pairwise interactions. SIAM Journal
on Scientific Computing 2021, 43, A164–A192.
114Kirn, J.; Rees, D. Crystallographic structure and functional
implications of the nitrogenase molybdenum–iron protein from
Azotobacter vinelandii. Nature 1992, 360, 553–560.
115Sharma, S.; Chan, G. K.-L. Communication: A flexible multi-
reference perturbation theory by minimizing the Hylleraas func-
tional with matrix product states. The Journal of Chemical
Physics 2014, 141, 111101.
116Shewchuk, J. R., et al. An introduction to the conjugate gradient
method without the agonizing pain. 1994.
117Harman, H. H.; Jones, W. H. Factor analysis by minimizing
residuals (minres). Psychometrika 1966, 31, 351–368.
118Hicken, J. E.; Zingg, D. W. A simplified and flexible variant of
GCROT for solving nonsymmetric linear systems. SIAM Jour-
nal on Scientific Computing 2010, 32, 1672–1694.
119Van Gijzen, M. B.; Sonneveld, P. Algorithm 913: An elegant
IDR (s) variant that efficiently exploits biorthogonality proper-
ties. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software 2011, 38,
1–19.
120Mohr, S.; Dawson, W.; Wagner, M.; Caliste, D.; Nakajima, T.;
Genovese, L. Efficient computation of sparse matrix functions
for large-scale electronic structure calculations: The CheSS li-
brary. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2017, 13,
4684–4698.
121Paige, C. C.; Saunders, M. A. LSQR: An algorithm for sparse
linear equations and sparse least squares. ACM Transactions on
Mathematical Software 1982, 8, 43–71.
122Zhai, H.; Gao, Y.; Chan, G. K.-L. pyblock3: an efficient python
block-sparse tensor and MPS/DMRG library. 2021; https://
github.com/block-hczhai/pyblock3-preview.
123Harris, C. R.; Millman, K. J.; Van Der Walt, S. J.; Gommers, R.;
Virtanen, P.; Cournapeau, D.; Wieser, E.; Taylor, J.; Berg, S.;
Smith, N. J., et al. Array programming with NumPy. Nature
2020, 585, 357–362.
124Paszke, A.; Gross, S.; Chintala, S.; Chanan, G.; Yang, E.; De-
Vito, Z.; Lin, Z.; Desmaison, A.; Antiga, L.; Lerer, A. Automatic
differentiation in pytorch. 2017,
125Hirata, S. Tensor contraction engine: Abstraction and au-
tomated parallel implementation of configuration-interaction,
coupled-cluster, and many-body perturbation theories. The
Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2003, 107, 9887–9897.
126Hirata, S. Symbolic algebra in quantum chemistry. Theoretical
Chemistry Accounts 2006, 116, 2–17.
127Neuscamman, E.; Yanai, T.; Chan, G. K.-L. Quadratic canon-
ical transformation theory and higher order density matrices.
The Journal of chemical physics 2009, 130, 124102.
128Saitow, M.; Kurashige, Y.; Yanai, T. Multireference configura-
tion interaction theory using cumulant reconstruction with in-
ternal contraction of density matrix renormalization group wave
function. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2013, 139, 044118.
129MacLeod, M. K.; Shiozaki, T. Communication: Automatic code
generation enables nuclear gradient computations for fully inter-
nally contracted multireference theory.The Journal of Chemical
Physics 2015, 142, 051103.
130Saitow, M.; Kurashige, Y.; Yanai, T. Fully internally contracted
multireference configuration interaction theory using density
matrix renormalization group: A reduced-scaling implementa-
tion derived by computer-aided tensor factorization. Journal of
Chemical Theory and Computation 2015, 11, 5120–5131.
131Evangelista, F. A. Automatic derivation of many-body theories
based on general Fermi vacua.The Journal of Chemical Physics
2022, 157, 064111.
132Saue, T. Relativistic Hamiltonians for chemistry: A primer.
ChemPhysChem 2011, 12, 3077–3094.
133Schurkus, H.; Chen, D.-T.; Cheng, H.-P.; Chan, G. K.-L.; Stan-
ton, J. Theoretical prediction of magnetic exchange coupling
constants from broken-symmetry coupled cluster calculations.
The Journal of Chemical Physics 2020, 152, 234115.
134Zgid, D.; Nooijen, M. Obtaining the two-body density matrix in
the density matrix renormalization group method. The Journal
of Chemical Physics 2008, 128, 144115.
135Guo, S.; Watson, M. A.; Hu, W.; Sun, Q.; Chan, G. K.-L. N-
electron valence state perturbation theory based on a density
matrix renormalization group reference function, with applica-
tions to the chromium dimer and a trimer model of poly (p-
phenylenevinylene). Journal of Chemical Theory and Compu-
tation 2016, 12, 1583–1591.
136Angeli, C.; Cimiraglia, R.; Malrieu, J.-P. n-electron valence state
perturbation theory: A spinless formulation and an efficient im-
plementation of the strongly contracted and of the partially con-
tracted variants. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2002, 117,
9138–9153.
137Legeza, ¨O.; S´ olyom, J. Optimizing the density-matrix renor-
malization group method using quantum information entropy.
Physical Review B 2003, 68, 195116.
138Boguslawski, K.; Tecmer, P.; Legeza, O.; Reiher, M. Entangle-
ment measures for single-and multireference correlation effects.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2012, 3, 3129–3135.
139Liu, G.; Li, W.; You, W. Bipartite entanglement of the one-
dimensional extended quantum compass model in a transverse
field. The European Physical Journal B 2012, 85, 1–6.
140Lee, S.; Zhai, H.; Sharma, S.; Umrigar, C. J.; Chan, G. K.-L.
Externally corrected ccsd with renormalized perturbative triples
(R-ecCCSD (T)) and the density matrix renormalization group
19
and selected configuration interaction external sources. Journal
of Chemical Theory and Computation 2021, 17, 3414–3425.
141Magoulas, I.; Gururangan, K.; Piecuch, P.; Deustua, J. E.;
Shen, J. Is externally corrected coupled cluster always better
than the underlying truncated configuration interaction? Jour-
nal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2021, 17, 4006–4027.
142Kinoshita, T.; Hino, O.; Bartlett, R. J. Coupled-cluster method
tailored by configuration interaction. The Journal of Chemical
Physics 2005, 123, 074106.
143Hino, O.; Kinoshita, T.; Chan, G. K.-L.; Bartlett, R. Tailored
coupled cluster singles and doubles method applied to calcu-
lations on molecular structure and harmonic vibrational fre-
quencies of ozone. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2006, 124,
114311–114311.
144Veis, L.; Antal´ ık, A.; Brabec, J.; Neese, F.; Legeza, O.; Pit-
tner, J. Coupled cluster method with single and double exci-
tations tailored by matrix product state wave functions. The
Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2016, 7, 4072–4078.
145Faulstich, F. M.; M´ at´ e, M.; Laestadius, A.; Csirik, M. A.;
Veis, L.; Antalik, A.; Brabec, J.; Schneider, R.; Pittner, J.;
Kvaal, S., et al. Numerical and theoretical aspects of the
DMRG-TCC method exemplified by the nitrogen dimer. Jour-
nal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2019, 15, 2206–2220.
146Mitrushchenkov, A. O.; Fano, G.; Linguerri, R.; Palmieri, P.
On the importance of orbital localization in QC-DMRG cal-
culations. International Journal of Quantum Chemistry 2012,
112, 1606–1619.
147Shepard, R.; Brozell, S. R.; Gidofalvi, G. The representation and
parametrization of orthogonal matrices.The Journal of Physical
Chemistry A 2015, 119, 7924–7939.
148Kuhn, H. W. The Hungarian method for the assignment prob-
lem. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 1955, 2, 83–97.
149Fukuda, K.; Matsui, T. Finding all the perfect matchings in
bipartite graphs. Applied Mathematics Letters 1994, 7, 15–18.
150Ramasesha, S.; Pati, S. K.; Krishnamurthy, H.; Shuai, Z.;
Br´ edas, J. Low-lying electronic excitations and nonlinear optic
properties of polymers via symmetrized density matrix renor-
malization group method. Synthetic Metals 1997, 85, 1019–
1022.
151Dorando, J. J.; Hachmann, J.; Chan, G. K.-L. Analytic response
theory for the density matrix renormalization group. The Jour-
nal of Chemical Physics 2009, 130, 184111.
152Lee, S.; Zhai, H.; Chan, G. K.-L. An Ab Initio Correction Vec-
tor Restricted Active Space Approach to the L-Edge XAS and
2p3d RIXS Spectra of Transition Metal Complexes. Journal of
Chemical Theory and Computation 2023, 19, 7753–7763.
153Wathen, A. J. Preconditioning. Acta Numerica 2015, 24, 329–
376.
154Holzner, A.; Weichselbaum, A.; McCulloch, I. P.;
Schollw¨ ock, U.; von Delft, J. Chebyshev matrix product
state approach for spectral functions. Physical Review B 2011,
83, 195115.
155Braun, A.; Schmitteckert, P. Numerical evaluation of Green’s
functions based on the Chebyshev expansion. Physical Review
B 2014, 90, 165112.
156Xie, H.; Huang, R.; Han, X.; Yan, X.; Zhao, H.; Xie, Z.; Liao, H.;
Xiang, T. Reorthonormalization of Chebyshev matrix product
states for dynamical correlation functions. Physical Review B
2018, 97, 075111.
157Jiang, T.; Ren, J.; Shuai, Z. Chebyshev matrix product states
with canonical orthogonalization for spectral functions of many-
body systems. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2021,
12, 9344–9352.
158Haegeman, J.; Cirac, J. I.; Osborne, T. J.; Piˇ zorn, I.; Ver-
schelde, H.; Verstraete, F. Time-dependent variational princi-
ple for quantum lattices. Physical Review Letters 2011, 107,
070601.
159Kinder, J. M.; Ralph, C. C.; Chan, G. K.-L. Analytic time evo-
lution, random phase approximation, and Green functions for
matrix product states. Quantum Information and Computation
for Chemistry 2014, 179–192.
160Nakatani, N.; Wouters, S.; Van Neck, D.; Chan, G. K.-L. Linear
response theory for the density matrix renormalization group:
Efficient algorithms for strongly correlated excited states. The
Journal of Chemical Physics 2014, 140, 024108.
161Haegeman, J.; Lubich, C.; Oseledets, I.; Vandereycken, B.; Ver-
straete, F. Unifying time evolution and optimization with ma-
trix product states. Physical Review B 2016, 94, 165116.
162Heidrich-Meisner, F.; Feiguin, A. E.; Dagotto, E. Real-time sim-
ulations of nonequilibrium transport in the single-impurity An-
derson model. Physical Review B 2009, 79, 235336.
163Jiang, T.; Li, W.; Ren, J.; Shuai, Z. Finite temperature dynam-
ical density matrix renormalization group for spectroscopy in
frequency domain. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters
2020, 11, 3761–3768.
164Ren, J.; Shuai, Z.; Chan, G. K.-L. Time-dependent density ma-
trix renormalization group algorithms for nearly exact absorp-
tion and fluorescence spectra of molecular aggregates at both
zero and finite temperature. Journal of Chemical Theory and
Computation 2018, 14, 5027–5039.
165Peng, R.; White, A. F.; Zhai, H.; Chan, G. K.-L. Conserva-
tion laws in coupled cluster dynamics at finite temperature. The
Journal of Chemical Physics 2021, 155, 044103.
166Loos, P.-F.; Gill, P. M. The uniform electron gas. Wiley Inter-
disciplinary Reviews: Computational Molecular Science 2016,
6, 410–429.
167Szalay, P. G.; Muller, T.; Gidofalvi, G.; Lischka, H.; Shepard, R.
Multiconfiguration self-consistent field and multireference con-
figuration interaction methods and applications. Chemical Re-
views 2012, 112, 108–181.
168Yanai, T.; Kurashige, Y.; Neuscamman, E.; Chan, G. K.-L. Mul-
tireference quantum chemistry through a joint density matrix
renormalization group and canonical transformation theory.The
Journal of chemical physics 2010, 132, 024105.
169Kurashige, Y.; Yanai, T. Second-order perturbation theory
with a density matrix renormalization group self-consistent field
reference function: Theory and application to the study of
chromium dimer. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2011, 135,
094104.
170Sharma, S.; Alavi, A. Multireference linearized coupled clus-
ter theory for strongly correlated systems using matrix product
states. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2015, 143, 102815.
171Luo, Z.; Ma, Y.; Wang, X.; Ma, H. Externally-contracted mul-
tireference configuration interaction method using a DMRG ref-
erence wave function. Journal of Chemical Theory and Compu-
tation 2018, 14, 4747–4755.
172Sharma, P.; Bernales, V.; Knecht, S.; Truhlar, D. G.;
Gagliardi, L. Density matrix renormalization group pair-density
functional theory (DMRG-PDFT): singlet–triplet gaps in poly-
acenes and polyacetylenes. Chemical Science 2019, 10, 1716–
1723.
173Beran, P.; Matouˇ sek, M.; Hapka, M.; Pernal, K.; Veis, L. Den-
sity matrix renormalization group with dynamical correlation
via adiabatic connection.Journal of Chemical Theory and Com-
putation 2021, 17, 7575–7585.
174Khokhlov, D.; Belov, A. Toward an accurate Ab initio descrip-
tion of low-lying singlet excited states of polyenes. Journal of
Chemical Theory and Computation 2021, 17, 4301–4315.
175Guo, S.; Li, Z.; Chan, G. K.-L. A perturbative density matrix
renormalization group algorithm for large active spaces.Journal
of Chemical Theory and Computation 2018, 14, 4063–4071.
176Sharma, S.; Jeanmairet, G.; Alavi, A. Quasi-degenerate per-
turbation theory using matrix product states. The Journal of
Chemical Physics 2016, 144, 034103.
177Sharma, S.; Knizia, G.; Guo, S.; Alavi, A. Combining inter-
nally contracted states and matrix product states to perform
multireference perturbation theory. Journal of Chemical The-
ory and Computation 2017, 13, 488–498.
178Barcza, G.; Werner, M. A.; Zar´ and, G.; Pershin, A.;
Benedek, Z.; Legeza, O.; Szilv´ asi, T. Toward Large-Scale Re-
20
stricted Active Space Calculations Inspired by the Schmidt De-
composition. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2022, 126,
9709–9718.
179Szalay, P. G.; Bartlett, R. J. Multi-reference averaged quadratic
coupled-cluster method: a size-extensive modification of multi-
reference CI. Chemical Physics Letters 1993, 214, 481–488.
180Gdanitz, R. J.; Ahlrichs, R. The averaged coupled-pair func-
tional (ACPF): A size-extensive modification of MRCI(SD).
Chemical Physics Letters 1988, 143, 413–420.
181Angeli, C.; Cimiraglia, R.; Evangelisti, S.; Leininger, T.; Mal-
rieu, J.-P. Introduction of n-electron valence states for multiref-
erence perturbation theory. The Journal of Chemical Physics
2001, 114, 10252–10264.
182Angeli, C.; Pastore, M.; Cimiraglia, R. New perspectives in mul-
tireference perturbation theory: the n-electron valence state ap-
proach. Theoretical Chemistry Accounts 2007, 117, 743–754.
183Fink, R. F. Two new unitary-invariant and size-consistent per-
turbation theoretical approaches to the electron correlation en-
ergy. Chemical Physics Letters 2006, 428, 461–466.
184Fink, R. F. The multi-reference retaining the excitation de-
gree perturbation theory: A size-consistent, unitary invariant,
and rapidly convergent wavefunction based ab initio approach.
Chemical Physics 2009, 356, 39–46.
185Roemelt, M.; Guo, S.; Chan, G. K.-L. A projected approxima-
tion to strongly contracted N-electron valence perturbation the-
ory for DMRG wavefunctions.The Journal of Chemical Physics
2016, 144, 204113.
186Jakob, W.; Rhinelander, J.; Moldovan, D. pybind11–Seamless
operability between C++11 and Python. 2017; https://
github.com/pybind/pybind11.
187Cui, Z.-H.; Zhu, T.; Chan, G. K.-L. Efficient implementation of
ab initio quantum embedding in periodic systems: Density ma-
trix embedding theory. Journal of Chemical Theory and Com-
putation 2019, 16, 119–129.
188Sun, C.; Ray, U.; Cui, Z.-H.; Stoudenmire, M.; Ferrero, M.;
Chan, G. K.-L. Finite-temperature density matrix embedding
theory. Physical Review B 2020, 101, 075131.
189Cui, Z.-H.; Zhai, H.; Zhang, X.; Chan, G. K.-L. Systematic
electronic structure in the cuprate parent state from quantum
many-body simulations. Science 2022, 377, 1192–1198.
190Cui, Z.-H.; Yang, J.; T¨ olle, J.; Ye, H.-Z.; Zhai, H.; Kim, R.;
Zhang, X.; Lin, L.; Berkelbach, T. C.; Chan, G. K.-L. Ab initio
quantum many-body description of superconducting trends in
the cuprates. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.16561 2023,
191Zhu, T.; Cui, Z.-H.; Chan, G. K.-L. Efficient formulation of
ab initio quantum embedding in periodic systems: Dynamical
mean-field theory. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computa-
tion 2019, 16, 141–153.
192Zhu, T.; Chan, G. K.-L. Ab Initio Full Cell G W+ DMFT for
Correlated Materials. Physical Review X 2021, 11, 021006.
193Aquilante, F.; Autschbach, J.; Baiardi, A.; Battaglia, S.;
Borin, V. A.; Chibotaru, L. F.; Conti, I.; De Vico, L.; Del-
cey, M.; Fdez. Galv´ an, I., et al. Modern quantum chemistry
with [Open] Molcas. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2020,
152, 214117.
194Liu, F.; Kurashige, Y.; Yanai, T.; Morokuma, K. Multirefer-
ence ab initio density matrix renormalization group (DMRG)-
CASSCF and DMRG-CASPT2 study on the photochromic ring
opening of spiropyran. Journal of Chemical Theory and Com-
putation 2013, 9, 4462–4469.
195Wouters, S.; Van Speybroeck, V.; Van Neck, D. DMRG-
CASPT2 study of the longitudinal static second hyperpolariz-
ability of all-trans polyenes. The Journal of Chemical Physics
2016, 145, 054120.
196Nakatani, N.; Guo, S. Density matrix renormalization group
(DMRG) method as a common tool for large active-space CASS-
CF/CASPT2 calculations. The Journal of Chemical Physics
2017, 146, 094102.
197Kurashige, Y.; Chalupsk` y, J.; Lan, T. N.; Yanai, T. Com-
plete active space second-order perturbation theory with cumu-
lant approximation for extended active-space wavefunction from
density matrix renormalization group. The Journal of Chemical
Physics 2014, 141, 174111.
198Phung, Q. M.; Wouters, S.; Pierloot, K. Cumulant approxi-
mated second-order perturbation theory based on the density
matrix renormalization group for transition metal complexes:
A benchmark study. Journal of Chemical Theory and Compu-
tation 2016, 12, 4352–4361.
199Li, C.; Evangelista, F. A. Multireference theories of electron
correlation based on the driven similarity renormalization group.
Annual Review of Physical Chemistry 2019, 70, 245–273.
200Qiskit contributors, Qiskit: An Open-source Framework
for Quantum Computing. 2023; https://github.com/Qiskit/
qiskit.