Filter Function Formalism and Software Package to Compute Quantum Processes of
Gate Sequences for Classical Non-Markovian Noise
Tobias Hangleiter,∗ Pascal Cerfontaine,† and Hendrik Bluhm
JARA-FIT Institute for Quantum Information, Forschungszentrum
Jülich GmbH and RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany
Correlated, non-Markovian noise is present in many solid-state systems employed as hosts for
quantum information technologies, signiﬁcantly complicating the realistic theoretical description of
these systems. In this regime, the eﬀects of noise on sequences of quantum gates cannot be described
by concatenating isolated quantum operations if the environmental correlation times are on the scale
of the typical gate durations. The ﬁlter function formalism has been successful in characterizing the
decay of coherence under the inﬂuence of such classical, non-Markovian environments and here we
show it can be applied to describe unital evolution within the quantum operations formalism. We
ﬁnd exact results for the quantum process and a simple composition rule for a sequence of operations.
This enables the detailed study of eﬀects of noise correlations on algorithms and periodically driven
systems. Moreover, we point out the method’s suitability for numerical applications and present
the open-source Python software packagefilter_functions. Amongst other things, it facilitates
computing the noise-averaged transfer matrix representation of a unital quantum operation in the
presence of universal classical noise for arbitrary control sequences. We apply the presented methods
to selected examples.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the circuit model of quantum computing, computa-
tions are driven by applying time-local quantum gates.
Any algorithm can be compiled using sequences of one-
and two-qubit gates [1]. Ideal, error-free gates are repre-
sented by unitary transformations, so that simulating the
action of an algorithm on an initial state of a quantum
computer amounts to simple matrix multiplication. Real
implementationsaresubjecttonoisethatcausesdecoher-
ence resulting in gate errors. If the noise is uncorrelated
between gates, its eﬀect can be described by quantum op-
erations acting as linear maps on density matrices, even
when several gates are concatenated. A closely related
approach is the use of a Master equation in Lindblad
form [2], which governs the dynamics of density matrices
under the inﬂuence of Markovian noise with a ﬂat power
spectral density.
Yet many physical systems used as hosts for qubits
do not satisfy the condition of uncorrelated noise. One
example frequently encountered in solid state systems is
that of 1/f noise, which in principle contains arbitrarily
long correlation times. It emerges for instance as ﬂux
noise in superconducting qubits and electrical noise in
quantum dot qubits [3–6]. Whereas simple approaches
exist to treat for example quasistatic noise, which cor-
responds to perfectly correlated noise (i.e. a spectrum
with weight only at zero frequency), they cannot be ap-
plied to 1/f noise because of the wide distribution of
correlation times it contains. Thus, there is a gap in the
mathematical descriptions of gate operations for noises
with arbitrary power spectra that exist between the ex-
tremal cases of perfectly ﬂat (white) and sharply peaked
∗ tobias.hangleiter@rwth-aachen.de
† pascal.cerfontaine@rwth-aachen.de
(quasistatic) spectra. To capture experimentally relevant
eﬀects important to understand the capabilities of quan-
tum computing systems, a universally applicable formal-
ism is hence desirable. For example, one may expect the
ﬁdelity requirements for quantum error correction to be
more stringent for correlated noise as errors of diﬀerent
gates can interfere constructively [7]. On the other hand,
it might also be possible to use correlation eﬀects to one’s
beneﬁt, attenuating decoherence by cleverly constructing
the gate sequences in algorithms.
As experimental platforms begin to approach ﬁdelity
limits set by employing primitive pulse schemes [5, 8, 9]
and detailed knowledge about noise sources and spectra
in solid-state systems becomes available [10–12], control
pulse optimizations tailored towards speciﬁc systems will
be required to further push ﬁdelities beyond the error
correction threshold [13, 14]. This calls for ﬂexible and
generically applicable tools as a basis for the numerical
optimization of pulses as well as the detailed analysis of
the quantum processes they eﬀect. In order to obtain a
useful description also for gate operations that decouple
from leading orders of noise, such as dynamically cor-
rected gates (DCGs) [15], beyond leading order or exact
results are required.
In an accompanying publication [16] we presented a
formalism based on ﬁlter functions and the Magnus ex-
pansion (ME) that addresses these needs and limitations
of the canonical master equation approach for correlated
noise. Speciﬁcally, we showed how process descriptions
can be obtained perturbatively for arbitrary classical
noise spectra and derived a concatenation rule to obtain
the ﬁlter function of a sequence of gates from those of
the individual gates. This paper extends these results.
Filter functions (FFs) were originally introduced to de-
scribe the decay of phase coherence under dynamical de-
coupling (DD) sequences [17–20] consisting of wait times
and perfect π-pulses. The formalism facilitated recog-
arXiv:2103.02403v2  [quant-ph]  25 Oct 2021

2
nizing these sequences as band-pass ﬁlters that allow
for probing the environmental noise characteristics of a
quantum system through noise spectroscopy [12, 21–23]
or optimizing sequences to suppress speciﬁc noise bands
[24–27]. It can also be extended to ﬁdelities of gate oper-
ations for single [28, 29] or multiple [30, 31] qubits using
the ME [32, 33] as well as more general DD protocols
[34]. The works by Greenet al. [29] and Clausenet al.
[35] also introduced the notion of the control matrix as
a quantity closely related to the canonical ﬁlter function
that is convenient for calculations. In this context, the
formalism’s capability to predict ﬁdelities of gate imple-
mentations has been identiﬁed and experimentally tested
[26, 29, 36, 37]. Recently, it has also proved useful in as-
sessing the performance requirements for classical control
electronics [38].
While analytic approaches allow for the calculation of
ﬁlter functions of arbitrary quantum control protocols in
principle, it is in practice often a tedious task to deter-
mine analytic solutions to the integrals involved if the
complexity of the applied wave forms goes beyond sim-
ple square pulses or extend to multiple qubits. Moreover,
one does not always have a closed-form expression of the
control at hand, such as is the case for numerically opti-
mized control pulses. This calls for a numerical approach
which, while giving up some of the insights an analytical
form oﬀers, is universally applicable and eliminates the
need for laborious analytic calculations.
Here, we build and extend upon our accompanying
work of Ref. 16 and that of Ref. 29 to show that the for-
malism can be recast within the framework of stochastic
Liouville equations by means of the cumulant expansion
[39, 40] which, for Gaussian noise, entails exact results
for the quantum process of an arbitrary control opera-
tion using only ﬁrst and second order terms of the ME
[32]. Moreover, due to the fact that the ME retains
the algebraic structure of the expanded quantity [33] we
are able to separate decoherent and coherent contribu-
tions to the process. We give explicit methods to eval-
uate these terms for piecewise-constant control pulses.
Moreover, we show that the formalism naturally lends
itself as a tool for numerical calculations and present
the filter_functions Python software package that en-
ables calculating the ﬁlter function of arbitrary, piecewise
constant deﬁned pulses [41]. On top of providing meth-
ods to handle individual quantum gates, the package also
implements the concatenation operation as well as paral-
lelized execution of pulses on diﬀerent groups of qubits,
allowing for a highly modular and hence computationally
powerful treatment of quantum algorithms in the pres-
ence of correlated noise. Given an arbitrary, classical
noise spectral density, it can be used to calculate a ma-
trix representation of the error process. From this matrix
one can extract average gate ﬁdelities, transition proba-
bilities, and leakage rates as we derive below. To simplify
adaptation the software’s API is strongly inspired by and
compatible with QuTiP [42] as well asqopt [43]. This al-
lows users to use these packages in conjunction. Assess-
ing the computational performance, we show that our
method outperforms Monte Carlo simulations for single
gates. New analytic results applicable to periodic Hamil-
tonians and employing the concatenation property make
this advantage even more pronounced for sequences of
gates. To highlight the main software features, we show
example applications below.
We provide this package in the expectation that it will
be a useful tool for the community. Besides recasting
and expanding on our earlier introduction of the formal-
ism in Ref. 16, the present paper is intended to provide
an overview of the software and its capabilities. It is
structured as follows: In Section II we derive an exact
expression for unital quantum operations in the presence
of non-Markovian Gaussian noise and lay out how it may
be evaluated using the ﬁlter function formalism. We re-
view the concatenation of quantum operations shown in
Ref.16andfurthermoreadaptthemethodbyGreen et al.
[29] to calculate the ﬁlter function of an arbitrary con-
trol sequence numerically. We will speciﬁcally focus on
computational aspects of the formalism and lay out how
to compute various quantities of interest. Moreover, we
classify its computational complexity for calculating av-
erage gate ﬁdelities and remark on simpliﬁcations that
allow for drastic improvements in performance in certain
applications. In Section IV, we introduce the software
packagebyoutliningtheprogrammaticstructureandgiv-
ing a brief overview over the API. Lastly, in Section V,
we show the application of the software by means of four
examples that highlight various features of the formal-
ism and its implementation. Therein, we ﬁrst demon-
strate that the formalism can predict average gate ﬁdeli-
ties for complex two-qubit quantum gates in agreement
with computationally much more costly Monte Carlo cal-
culations. Next, we show how it can be applied to pe-
riodically driven systems to eﬃciently analyze Rabi os-
cillations. We ﬁnally establish the formalism’s ability to
predict deviations from the simple concatenation of uni-
tary gates for sequences and algorithms in the presence
of correlated noise by simulating a randomized bench-
marking experiment as well as assembling a quantum
Fourier transform (QFT) circuit from numerically opti-
mized gates. We conclude by brieﬂy remarking on pos-
sible future application and extension of our method in
Section VI.
Throughout the paper we will denote operators by Ro-
man font, e.g.U, and quantum operations and their rep-
resentations as transfer matrices by calligraphic font, e.g.
U, which we also use for the control matrix ˜B to em-
phasize its innate connection to a transfer matrix. For
consistency, a unitary quantum operation will share the
same character as the corresponding unitary operator.
An operator in the interaction picture will furthermore
be designated by an overset tilde, e.g.˜H =U†HU withU
the unitary operator deﬁning the co-moving frame. Def-
initions of new quantities on the left and right side of
an equality are denoted by:= and =:, respectively. We
use a central dot (·) as a placeholder in some deﬁnitions

3
of abstract operators such as the Liouvillian, denoted by
L := [H,· ], which is to be understood as the commuta-
tor of the corresponding HamiltonianH and the operator
thatL acts on. The identity matrix is denoted by1 and
its dimension always inferred from context. Furthermore,
we will use Greek letters for indices that correspond to
noise operators in order to distinguish them clearly from
thosethatcorrespondtobasisormatrixelements. Lastly,
we work in units whereℏ = 1.
II. FILTER FUNCTION FORMALISM FOR
UNITAL QUANTUM OPERATIONS
We begin the theoretical part of this article by showing
how a superoperator matrix representation of the error
process, the “error transfer matrix”, of a unital quantum
operation can be computed from the control matrix of
the pulse implementing the operation. The control ma-
trix relates the operators through which noise couples
into the system to a set of basis operators in the inter-
action picture and we detail how it can be calculated
in a relatively eﬃcient manner for two diﬀerent situa-
tions. First, we consider a sequence of gates whose con-
trol matrices have been precomputed. Second, we lay out
how the control matrix can be obtained from scratch un-
der the assumption of piecewise constant control, which
is often convenient for approximating continuous pulse
shapes. Other wave forms can be dealt with analogously
by solving the corresponding integrals. We then move
on to show how several quantities of interest can be ex-
tracted and present optimized strategies for computing
the central objects of the formalism.
A. Transfer matrix representation of quantum
operations
1. Brief review of quantum operations and superoperators
The quantum operations formalism provides a general
framework for the description of open quantum systems
[44, 45]. It forms the mathematical basis for quantum
process tomography (QPT) [46, 47] as well as gate set
tomography (GST) [48, 49] and has also been extensively
employed in the context of randomized benchmarking
(RB) [50, 51]. Several diﬀerent representations of quan-
tum operations exist. While all of them are equivalent
one typically chooses the most convenient for the prob-
lem at hand. For an overview of the most commonly used
representationsseeRef.49andformatrixrepresentations
in particular Ref. 52 and the references therein. In this
work we employ the Liouville representation, to the best
of our knowledge ﬁrst formalized by Fano [53], to proﬁt
from its simple properties under composition. It is also
known as the transfer matrix representation and we will
use the terms interchangeably below. We now brieﬂy re-
view the concept and refer the reader to the literature for
further details. Concretely, the Liouville representation
of an operationE :ρ→E (ρ) acting on density operators
in a Hilbert spaceH of dimensiond is given by
Eij
.= tr
(
C†
iE(Cj)
)
(1)
with an operator basisC ={C0,C 1,...,C d2−1} for the
space of linear operators over H , L(H ), orthonormal
with respect to the Hilbert-Schmidt product⟨A,B⟩ :=
tr
(
A†B
)
. In the case that the operator basis corresponds
to the Pauli matrices Eq. (1) is known as the Pauli trans-
fer matrix (PTM). The operationE is thus associated
with ad2×d2 matrix inLiouville space L that describes
its action as the degree to which thej-th basis element
is mapped onto thei-th. On L one can identify a set
of basis kets{|Ci⟩⟩}d2−1
i=0 ={|i⟩⟩}d2−1
i=0 isomorphic to the
operatorsCi (and correspondingly bras⟨⟨i| to the adjoint
C†
i) as well as the inner product⟨⟨i|j⟩⟩=⟨Ci,Cj⟩. As the
vectors|i⟩⟩form an orthonormal basis, any operator on
H can be written as a vector onL,|A⟩⟩=∑
i|i⟩⟩⟨⟨i|A⟩⟩,
whereas a superoperator onH becomes a matrix onL,
see Eq. (1). It can then be shown that density opera-
tors represented by vectors are propagated by transfer
matrices so that the action of a quantum operationE
on a density operator ρ is given by|E(ρ)⟩⟩ =E|ρ⟩⟩ =∑
ij|i⟩⟩⟨⟨i|E|j⟩⟩⟨⟨j|ρ⟩⟩. Thus, the composition of two op-
erationsE1 andE2 corresponds to matrix multiplication
in Liouville space,[E2◦E1]ik =∑
j[E2]ij[E1]jk, a property
which makes the representation particularly attractive
for sequences of operations. Although from a numerical
perspective the computational complexity scales unfavor-
ably with the system dimensiond (c.f. Section IIID), we
will employ the Liouville representation for its transpar-
ent interpretation and concise behavior under composi-
tion in the following analytical considerations. Lastly,
we note that forC0∝ 1, trace-preservation and unital-
ity are encoded in the relationsE0j =δ0j andEj0 =δj0,
respectively.
2. Liouville representation of the error channel
We will now derive an expression for the quantum pro-
cess of a quantum gate in the presence of arbitrary classi-
cal noise. As a single realization of a classical noise gen-
erates strictly unitary dynamics, we will be interested in
the expectation value of the dynamics over many such re-
alizations, which willlead toa quantum processincluding
decoherence. If the noise is additionally Gaussian, these
results are exact and therefore apply without restrictions
to arbitrarily large noise strength as well as to gates that
partially decouple from noise. For such DCGs or DD
sequences [15, 20] higher order terms can become dom-
inant. In the case that the environment is not strictly
Gaussian, our approach becomes perturbative and we re-
cover the results presented in Ref. 16. As most of our
discussion later on in this article will focus on the lead-
ingorderapproximation, readersnotinterestedinthefull

4
generality may refer to that publication for a less general
but perhaps more accessible derivation and skip ahead to
Section IIB.
The diﬀerence is that in Ref. 16, the Magnus expansion
is applied to the solution of the Schrödinger equation,
whereas the approach presented here is based on the the-
ory of stochastic Liouville equations and the cumulant
expansion [39, 40]. In the ﬁlter function context, the cu-
mulant expansion has been used to express the decay of
the oﬀ-diagonal terms of a single-qubit density matrix in
Ref. 20. More recently, Paz-Silva and Viola [34] employed
it in conjunction with the ME to obtain the matrix ele-
ments of the perturbed density operator after a timeT of
noisy evolution. In Ref. 54, the authors made use of the
cumulant expansion and stochastic Liouville equations
for the purpose of gate optimization. Here, we combine
diﬀerent aspects of these works and make the connec-
tion to the quantum operations formalism by determin-
ing the noise-averaged error propagator in the Liouville
representation. This form completely characterizes the
error process and hence allows for detailed insight into
the decoherence mechanisms of the operation.
Concretely, we consider a system described by the
stochastic Hamiltonian
H(t) =Hc(t) +Hn(t), (2)
Hn(t) =
∑
α
bα(t)Bα(t). (3)
Hc(t) is implemented by the experimentalist to generate
the desired control operation during the timet∈ [0,τ ]
and Hn(t) describes classical ﬂuctuating noise environ-
mentsbα(t)∈ R that couple to the quantum system via
theHermitiannoiseoperators Bα(t)∈ L(H ). Thesemay
carry a general, deterministic time dependence and with-
out loss of generality, we can require them to be trace-
less since any contributions proportional to the identity
do not contribute to noisy evolution in any case [55].
The bα(t) are random variables drawn from (not neces-
sarily Gaussian) distributions with zero mean that are
assumed to be independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) both with respect to repetitions of the exper-
iment. Note that this concept of independence does
not preclude correlations between diﬀerent noise sources
α⁄= β nor between one noise source at diﬀerent times
t⁄=t′, but only serves to obtain a well-deﬁned ensemble
average. Lastly, to be able to later on relate the cor-
relation functions of thebα(t) to their spectral density,
we require the noise ﬁelds to be wide-sense stationary,
meaning that their correlation function depends only on
the time diﬀerence.
For noise operators without explicit time dependence,
Eq. (3) constitutes a universal decomposition as can
be seen by choosing the Bα from an orthonormal ba-
sis for L(H ). To motivate the time-dependent form
of Eq. (3), assume the true Hamiltonian is a function
of a set of noisy parameters⃗˜λ(t) = ⃗λ(t) + ⃗δλ(t) where
⃗δλ(t) = vec({bα(t)}α) are the stochastic variables. Ex-
panding the Hamiltonian in an orthonormal operator
basis yields H(⃗˜λ(t)) = ∑
αfα(⃗λ(t), ⃗δλ(t))Bα. In gen-
eral, however, the expansion coeﬃcientsfα will be arbi-
trary functions of both the deterministic parameters⃗λ(t)
and the stochastic noises ⃗δλ(t), which prohibits a fac-
torized form like Eq. (3). We can address this problem
by ﬁrst expandingH around ⃗λ(t) for small ﬂuctuations
⃗δλ(t). Then, the Hamiltonian approximately becomes
H(⃗˜λ(t))≈ H(⃗λ(t)) + ⃗δλ(t)· ⃗∇λH(⃗λ(t)), where we can
deﬁne the control Hamiltonian asHc(t) :=H(⃗λ(t)). Ex-
pandingthesecondtermintheoperatorbasisnowresults
in the form (3) for the noise Hamiltonian as it is linear in
⃗δλ(t) and the deterministic time dependence is contained
in ⃗∇λH(⃗λ(t)) alone.
This permits us to model complex relations between
physical noise sources and the noise operators that cap-
ture the coupling to the quantum system, arising for ex-
ample through control hardware or eﬀective Hamiltoni-
ans obtained from e.g. Schrieﬀer-Wolﬀ transformations.
While the linearization is in most cases an approxima-
tion, it does not impose signiﬁcant constraints since the
noise is typically weak compared to the control [56]. As
an example, we could capture a dependence of the de-
vice sensitivity on external controls (see also Ref. 30).
In a widely used setting electrons conﬁned in solid-state
quantum dots are manipulated using the exchange in-
teraction J that depends non-linearly on the potential
diﬀerenceϵ between two dots. Since the dominant physi-
cal noise source aﬀecting this control is charge noise, one
could include the eﬀect onJ(ϵ) to ﬁrst order withsϵ(t) =
∂J (ϵ(t))/∂ϵ(t) so thatHn(t) =bϵ(t)Bϵ(t) =bϵ(t)sϵ(t)Bϵ
for some operatorBϵ which represents the exchange cou-
pling.
Weproceedinourderivationbynotingthatthecontrol
HamiltonianHc gives rise to the noise-free Liouville–von
Neumann equation
dρ(t)
dt =−i[Hc(t),ρ (t)] =−iLc(t)ρ(t) (4)
on the Hilbert space H with the Liouvillian super-
operator Lc(t) representing the control. Analogous to
the Schrödinger equation we may also write this dif-
ferential equation in terms of time evolution superop-
erators (superpropagators), dUc(t)/dt = −iLc(t)Uc(t)
where the action ofUc on a stateρ is to be understood
asUc :ρ→UcρU†
c withUc the usual time evolution oper-
ator satisfying the corresponding Schrödinger equation.
This allows us to write the superpropagator for the total
LiouvillianL =Lc +Ln asU(t) =Uc(t) ˜U(t) where the
unitary error superpropagator ˜U(t) contains the eﬀect of
a speciﬁc noise realization in Eq. (3). Next, we transform
the noise LiouvillianLn to the interaction picture with
respect to the control LiouvillianLc so that ˜U(t) satisﬁes

5
the modiﬁed Liouville equation
d ˜U(t)
dt =−i ˜Ln(t) ˜U(t), (5)
˜Ln(t) =U†
c (t)Ln(t)Uc(t). (6)
Equation (5) may be formally solved using the Magnus
expansion [32] so that at timet =τ
˜U(τ) = exp(−iτLeﬀ(τ)) (7)
withLeﬀ(τ) = ∑∞
n=1Leﬀ,n(τ). A suﬃcient criterion for
the convergence of the expansion is given by Moanet al.
[57] as
∫τ
0 dt‖ ˜Ln(t)‖ < πwhere‖·‖ =
√
⟨· ,·⟩ is the
Frobenius (Hilbert-Schmidt) norm. The ﬁrst and second
terms of the ME are given by [32, 33]
Leﬀ,1(τ) = 1
τ
∫ τ
0
dt ˜Ln(t), (8a)
Leﬀ,2(τ) =− i
2τ
∫ τ
0
dt1
∫ t1
0
dt2
[
˜Ln(t1), ˜Ln(t2)
]
. (8b)
The n-th term of the expansion contains n factors of
the noise variablesbα(t) and scales withn factors of the
control duration τ, suggesting that higher-order terms
can be neglected if their product is small. In the Bloch
sphere picture this corresponds to requiring that the an-
gle by which the Bloch vector is rotated away from its
intended trajectory due to the noise be small. Below, we
will use the parameterξ to denote the magnitude of this
deviation. It is properly deﬁned in Appendix D1 where
also bounds for the convergence of the ME are discussed.
Here, we only state thatLeﬀ,n∼ξn (see also Ref. 29).
We have suggestively written the ME in terms of an
eﬀective LiouvillianLeﬀ = [Heﬀ,· ] to interpret it as the
generator of atime-averaged evolution of a single noise
realization up to timeτ. In order to obtain theensemble-
averaged evolution of many realizations of the stochastic
Hamiltonian in Eq. (3), we apply the cumulant expansion
to ˜U (see also Refs. 58 and 59),
⟨ ˜U(τ)⟩ =⟨exp(−iτLeﬀ(τ))⟩ =: expK(τ) (9)
with⟨·⟩ denoting the ensemble average [60] and the cu-
mulant function [39]
K(τ) =
∞∑
k=1
(−iτ)k
k!
⟨
Leﬀ(τ)k⟩
c (10)
=
∞∑
k=1
(−iτ)k
k!
⟨[∞∑
n=1
Leﬀ,n(τ)
]k⟩
c
. (11)
The notation⟨·⟩ c denotes the cumulant average which
prescribes a certain averaging operation. The ﬁrst cumu-
lantofasetofrandomvariables {Xi(t)}i issimplytheex-
pectation value,⟨Xi(t)⟩c =⟨Xi(t)⟩, whereas the second
cumulant corresponds to the covariance,⟨Xi(t)Xj(t)⟩c =
⟨Xi(t)Xj(t)⟩−⟨ Xi(t)⟩⟨Xj(t)⟩. Remarkably, third and
higher-order cumulants vanish for Gaussian processes
[40, 61], making Eq. (11) exact by truncating the sums
already at k = 2 and n = 2. In this case, the conver-
gence radius of the ME becomes inﬁnite. The terms with
k =n = 2 do not contribute as they involve fourth-order
cumulants. Since furthermore we assume that the noise
ﬁeldsbα(t)havezeromean, alsothetermswith k =n = 1
vanish and⟨Xi(t)Xj(t)⟩c =⟨Xi(t)Xj(t)⟩. We can hence
write the cumulant function succinctly as
K(τ) =−iτ⟨Leﬀ,2(τ)⟩− τ 2
2
⟨
Leﬀ,1(τ)2⟩
. (12)
Equations (9) and (12) allow us to exactly compute the
full quantum process ⟨ ˜U⟩ : ρ → ⟨˜U(ρ)⟩ for Gaussian
noise with arbitrary spectral density and power. For non-
Gaussian noise these expressions are approximate up to
O
(
ξ2)
and higher order terms include both higher or-
ders of the ME and the cumulant expansion. Inspecting
Eq. (12), we observe that the ﬁrst term is anti-Hermitian
as it is a pure Magnus term (remember that the ME pre-
serves algebraic structure to every order) and thus gen-
erates unitary, coherent time evolution. Conversely, the
second term is Hermitian and thus generates decoher-
ence [62]. The former is more diﬃcult to compute than
the latter because the second order of the ME, Eq. (8b),
contains nested time integrals. Arguments can be made
[16], however, that for single gates in an experimental
context the coherent errors captured by this term can
be calibrated out to a large degree [63, 64]. Moreover,
many of the central quantities of interest that can be
extracted from the quantum process, among which are
gate ﬁdelities and certain measurement probabilities, are
functions of only the diagonal elements ofK. By virtue
of the antisymmetry of the second order terms, they do
not contribute to these quantities to leading order as we
show in Section IID.
While we will also lay out how to compute the second
order, our discussion will therefore focus on contributions
from the incoherent term below. As it turns out, this
term can be computed using a ﬁlter function formalism
based on that by Greenet al.[29]. To see this, we insert
theexplicitformsoftheMEgiveninEq.(8)andthenoise
HamiltoniangiveninEq.(3)intoEq.(12). Togetherwith
[L,L′] = [[H,H′],· ] andLL′ = [H, [H′,· ]], we ﬁnd that

6
K(τ) =−1
2
∑
αβ
(∫ τ
0
dt1
∫ t1
0
dt2⟨bα(t1)bβ(t2)⟩
[[
˜Bα(t1), ˜Bβ(t2)
]
,·
]
+
∫ τ
0
dt1
∫ τ
0
dt2⟨bα(t1)bβ(t2)⟩
[
˜Bα(t1),
[
˜Bβ(t2),·
]])
, (13)
where ˜Bα(t) = U†
c (t)Bα(t)Uc(t) are the noise operators
of Eq. (3) in the interaction picture.⟨bα(t1)bβ(t2)⟩ is the
cross-correlation function of noise sourcesα andβ which
we will later relate to the spectral density. For now, we
stay in the time domain and introduce an orthonormal
and Hermitian operator basis for the Hilbert spaceH to
deﬁne the Liouville representation,
C ={Ck∈ L(H ) :C†
k =Ck and tr(CkCl) =δkl}d2−1
k=0 ,
(14)
where we chooseC0 = 1
/
d 1/2 for convenience so that
the remaining elements are traceless. In order to separate
the commutators from the time-dependence and hence
the integral in Eq. (13), we expand the noise operators
in this basis so that
˜Bα(t) =:
∑
k
˜Bαk(t)Ck. (15)
The expansion coeﬃcients ˜Bαk(t)∈ R are given by the
inner product of a noise operator in the interaction pic-
ture on the one hand and a basis element on the other:
˜Bαk(t) =⟨ ˜Bα(t),Ck⟩ = tr
(
U†
c (t)Bα(t)Uc(t)Ck
)
. (16)
In line with Greenet al.[29], we call these coeﬃcients the
control matrix (see also Refs. 65 and 35). In the trans-
fer matrix (superoperator) picture we can take up the
following interpretation for the control matrix by virtue
of the cyclicity of the trace: it describes a mapping of a
state, represented by the basis elementCk and subject
to the control operationUc(t) :Ck→Uc(t)CkU†
c (t), onto
the noise operatorBα(t). That is, we can write theα-
th row of the control matrix as⟨⟨˜Bα(t)| =⟨⟨Bα(t)|U c(t).
In this connection lies the power of the FF formalism
as will become clear shortly; we can ﬁrst determine the
ideal evolution without noise and subsequently evaluate
the error process by linking the unitary control operation
to the noise operators.
Having expanded the noise operators in the basisC,
we can already anticipate that upon substituting them,
Eq. (13) will separate into a time-dependent part involv-
ing on one hand the control matrix and cross-correlation
functions and on the other a time-independent part in-
volving commutators of basis elements. This will sim-
plify our calculations in the following. To see this, we
recall the deﬁnition of the Liouville representation in
Eq. (1) and apply it to the cumulant function so that
Kij = tr(CiK[Cj]), where the notationK[Cj] means sub-
stitutingCj for the placeholder· in the commutators in
Eq. (13) and we suppressed the time argument for leg-
ibility. Finally, we insert the expanded noise operators
given by Eq. (15) and obtain the Liouville representation
of the cumulant function,
Kij(τ) =:−1
2
∑
αβ
∑
kl
(fijkl∆αβ,kl +gijklΓαβ,kl). (17)
Here, we captured the ordering of the noise operators due
to the commutators in Eq. (13) in the coeﬃcientsfijkl
and gijkl. These are trivial functions of the fourth order
trace tensor [66]
Tijkl = tr(CiCjCkCl) (18)
given by
fijkl =Tklji−Tlkji−Tklij +Tlkij and (19a)
gijkl =Tklji−Tkjli−Tkilj +Tkijl. (19b)
Furthermore, we introduced the frequency (Lamb) shifts
∆ and decay amplitudesΓ which contain all information
on the noise and qubit dynamics as captured by the con-
trol matrix ˜B(t):
∆αβ,kl =
∫ τ
0
dt1
∫ t1
0
dt2⟨bα(t1)bβ(t2)⟩ ˜Bαk(t1) ¯Bβl(t2),
(20)
Γαβ,kl =
∫ τ
0
dt1
∫ τ
0
dt2⟨bα(t1)bβ(t2)⟩ ˜Bαk(t1) ¯Bβl(t2).
(21)
The frequency shifts ∆ correspond to the ﬁrst term in
Eq. (12), hence incurring coherent errors, i.e. generalized
axis and overrotation errors. They reﬂect a perturbative
correction to the quantum evolution due to a change of
the Hamiltonian at two points in time, and thus time or-
dering matters. Conversely, the decay amplitudesΓ cor-
respond to the second term and capture the decoherence.
These terms are due to an incoherent average that only
takes classical correlations into account, so that time or-
dering does not play a role. Note that Eq. (17) together
with Eq. (9) constitutes an exact version (in the Liou-
ville representation) of Eq. (4) from Ref. 16 for Gaussian
noise. The approximation of Ref. 16 is obtained by ex-
panding the exponential to linear order and neglecting
the second order terms∆.

7
For a single qubit andC the Pauli basis one can make
use of the simple commutation relations so that the cu-
mulant function takes the form (see Appendix A)
Kij(τ) =
{
−∑
k⁄=i Γkk if i =j,
−∆ij + ∆ji + Γij if i⁄=j, (22)
for i,j > 0 and anyα,β. As mentioned in Section IIA
the casesj = 0 and i = 0 encode trace-preservation and
unitality, respectively, and as suchK0j =Ki0 = 0 since
our model is both trace-preserving and unital.
B. Calculating the decay amplitudes
In order to evaluate the cumulant functionK(τ) given
by Eq. (17) and thus the transfer matrix⟨ ˜U(τ)⟩ from
Eq. (9) for a given control operation, we solely require
the decay amplitudesΓkl and frequency shifts∆kl since
the trace tensorTijkl depends only on the choice of basis
and is therefore trivial (although quite costly for large di-
mensions, c.f. Section IIIC) to calculate. In this section,
we describe simple methods for calculatingΓkl using an
extension of the ﬁlter function formalism developed by
Green et al.[29] that we introduced in Ref. 16. The cen-
tral quantity of interest will be the control matrix that
we already introduced above. It relates the interaction
picture noise operators to the operator basis and we will
compute it in Fourier space in order to identify the cross-
correlation functions with the noise spectral density in
Eq. (21). We distinguish between a sequence of quantum
gates, as already presented in our related work [16], and
a single gate. In the ﬁrst case the control matrix of the
entire sequence can be calculated from those of the in-
dividual gates, greatly simplifying the calculation if the
latter have been precomputed. This approach gives rise
to correlation terms in the expression forΓkl that cap-
ture the eﬀects of sequencing gates. In the second case,
as was shown by Greenet al.[29], one can calculate the
control matrix for arbitrary single pulses under the as-
sumption of piecewise constant control and we lay out
how to adapt the approach for numerical applications.
We start by noting that, because we assumed the noise
ﬁeldsbα(t) to be wide-sense stationary, that is to say
the cross-correlation functions evaluated at two diﬀer-
ent points in timet1 and t2 depend only on their dif-
ference t1−t2, we can deﬁne the two-sided noise power
spectral densitySαβ(ω) as the Fourier transform of the
cross-correlation functions⟨bα(t1)bβ(t2)⟩,
⟨bα(t1)bβ(t2)⟩ =
∫ ∞
−∞
dω
2πSαβ(ω)e−iω(t1−t2). (23)
Note that the spectrum only characterizes the noise fully
in the case of Gaussian noise. For non-Gaussian compo-
nents in the noise, additional polyspectra have in princi-
pletobeconsideredforhigher-ordercorrelationfunctions
[67]. However, since we only discuss second-order con-
tributions which involve two-point correlation functions
here, we only need to takeSαβ(ω) into account. Inserting
the deﬁnition of the spectral density into Eq. (21), one
ﬁnds
Γαβ,kl =
∫ ∞
−∞
dω
2π
˜B∗
αk(ω)Sαβ(ω) ˜Bβl(ω) (24)
with ˜B(ω) =
∫τ
0 dt ˜B(t)eiωt the frequency-domain control
matrix. Note that ˜B∗(ω) = ˜B(−ω) because ˜B(t) is real.
In the above equation, the fourth order tensor
Fαβ,kl(ω) := ˜B∗
αk(ω) ˜Bβl(ω) (25)
is the generalized ﬁlter function that captures the sus-
ceptibility of the decay amplitudes to noise at frequency
ω. For α = β,k = l, and by summing over the basis
elements,
Fα(ω) =
∑
k
⏐⏐ ˜Bαk(ω)
⏐⏐2
= tr
(
˜B†
α(ω) ˜Bα(ω)
)
, (26)
and this tensor reduces to the canonical ﬁdelityﬁlter
function [28] from which the entanglement ﬁdelity can
be obtained, see Section IID1. Thus, if the frequency-
domain control matrix ˜Bαk(ω) for noise source α and
basis element k is known, the transfer matrix can be
evaluated by integrating Eq. (24). Moreover, one can
study the contributions of each pair of noise sources
(α,β ) both separately or, at virtually no additional cost
and to leading order, collectively by summing over them,
Γkl =∑
αβ Γαβ,kl.
We now discuss how to calculate the control matrix
˜B(ω) in frequency space for a given control operation.
We focus ﬁrst on sequences of quantum gates, assuming
that the control matrices ˜B(g)(ω) for each gateg have
been calculated before.
1. Control matrix of a gate sequence
For a sequence of gates with precomputed interaction
picture noise operators the approach developed by Green
et al. [29] based on piecewise constant control can be
adapted to yield an analytical expression for those of the
composite gate sequence that is computationally eﬃcient
to evaluate [16]. Here we review these results to give a
complete picture of the formalism. While our results are
general and apply to any superoperator representation,
we employ the Liouville representation here for its simple
compositionoperation: matrixmultiplication. Computa-
tionally, this is not the most eﬃcient choice since transfer
matrices have dimensiond2×d2 and thus their matrix
multiplication scales unfavorably compared to, for exam-
ple, left-right conjugation by unitaries (c.f. Section IIID).
However, because the structure of the control matrix˜B
is similar to that of a transfer matrix (remember that it
corresponds to a basis expansion of the interaction pic-
ture noise operators), we will obtain a particularly con-
cise expression for the sequence in the following. For a

8
P1 P2 · · · PG // ≡ QG //
t0 t1 t2 tG−1 tG t0 tG
Figure 1. Illustration of a sequence of G gates. Individual
gates with propagatorsPg start at timetg−1 and complete at
time tg. The total action fromt0 to tg is given byQg.
perhaps more intuitive description employing exclusively
conjugation by unitaries, we refer the reader to our ac-
companying publication Ref. 16.
A sequence of G gates with propagators Pg =
Uc(tg,tg−1),g∈{ 1,...,G } that act during theg-th time
interval (tg−1,tg] with t0 = 0,tG = τ as illustrated in
Fig. 1 is considered. The cumulative propagator of the
sequence up to timetg is then given byQg =∏0
g′=gPg′
with P0 = 1 and its Liouville representation denoted by
Q(g). Furthermore, the control matrix of theg-th pulse
at the timet−tg−1 relative to the start of segmentg is
˜B(g)
αk (t−tg−1) = tr
(
U†
c (t,tg−1)Bα(t−tg−1)Uc(t,tg−1)Ck
)
.
(27)
We can now exploit the fact that in the transfer ma-
trix picture quantum operations compose by matrix mul-
tiplication to write the total control matrix at time
t∈ (tg−1,tg] as
˜B(t) = ˜B(g)(t−tg−1)Q(g−1). (28)
The Fourier transform of Eq. (28) can then be obtained
by evaluating the transform of each gate separately,
˜B(ω) =
G∑
g=1
eiωtg−1 ˜B(g)(ω)Q(g−1) (29)
˜B(g)(ω) =
∫ ∆tg
0
dt eiωt ˜B(g)(t), (30)
with ∆tg =tg−tg−1 the duration of gateg. Hence, cal-
culating the control matrix of the full sequence requires
only the knowledge of the temporal positions, encoded in
the phase factors eiωtg−1, and the total intended action
Q(g−1) of the individual pulses if their control matrices
havebeenprecomputed. Thesequencestructurecanthus
be exploited to one’s beneﬁt. If the same gates appear
multiple times during the sequence one can reuse control
matrices for equal pulses to facilitate calculating ﬁlter
functions for complex sequences with modest computa-
tional eﬀort. Most importantly, Eq. (29) is independent
of the inner structure of the individual pulses and there-
fore takes the same time to evaluate whether they are
highly complex or very simple. In Section IIID, we will
analyze the computational eﬃciency of capitalizing on
this feature in more detail.
As we have seen, the total control matrix of a compos-
ite pulse sequence is given by a sum over the individual
control matrices. Since ˜B(ω) enters Eq. (24) twice, this
leads to correlation terms between two gates at diﬀerent
positions in the sequence when computing the total de-
cay amplitudes Γαβ,kl. Inserting Eq. (29) into Eq. (24)
gives
Γαβ,kl =
G∑
g,g′=1
∫ ∞
−∞
dω
2π
[
Q(g′−1)† ˜B(g′)†(ω)
]
kαSαβ(ω)
[ ˜B(g)(ω)Q(g−1)]
βleiω(tg−1−tg′−1)
=:
G∑
g,g′=1
∫ ∞
−∞
dω
2πSαβ(ω)F (gg′)
αβ,kl(ω)
(31)
where we deﬁned the pulse correlation ﬁlter function
F (gg′)
αβ,kl(ω) that captures the temporal correlations be-
tween pulses at diﬀerent positionsg and g′ in the se-
quence. Unlike regular ﬁlter functions, these can be neg-
ative forg⁄=g′ and therefore reduce the overall noise sus-
ceptibility of a sequence given byF (ω) =∑
gg′F (gg′)(ω).
We have thus gained a concise description of the noise-
cancelling properties of gate sequences: in this picture,
they arise purely from the concatenation of diﬀerent
pulses, quantifying, for instance, the eﬀectiveness of dy-
namical decoupling (DD) sequences [16].
2. Control matrix of a single gate
Previous eﬀorts have derived the control matrix an-
alytically for selected pulses such as dynamical decou-
pling (DD) sequences [20], special dynamically corrected
gates (DCGs) [30], as well as developed a general analytic
framework [28, 29]. However, analytical solutions might
not always be accessible, e.g. for numerically optimized
pulses, and are generally laborious to obtain. Therefore,
we now detail a method to obtain the control matrix
numerically under the assumption of piecewise constant
control. Our method is similar in spirit to that of Green
et al.[28] for single qubits withd = 2, but whereas those
authors computed analytical solutions to the relevant in-
tegrals during each time step, here we use matrix diago-

9
nalization to obtain the propagator of a control operation
to make the approach amenable to numerical implemen-
tation. This allows carrying out the Fourier transform of
the control matrix Eq. (16) analytically by writing the
control propagators in terms of their eigenvalues in diag-
onal form.
We divide the total duration of the control operation,
τ, into G intervals (tg−1,tg] of duration ∆tg with g ∈
{0,...,G } andt0 = 0,tG =τ. We then approximate the
control Hamiltonian as constant within each interval so
that within theg-th
Hc(t) =H(g)
c = const. (32)
and similarly the deterministic time dependence of the
noiseoperatorsas Bα(t) =sα(t)Bα =s(g)
α Bα. Underthis
approximation we can diagonalize the time-independent
Hamiltonians H(g)
c with eigenvalues ω(g)
i numerically
and write the time evolution operator that solves
the noise-free Schrödinger equation as Uc(t,tg−1) =
V (g)D(g)(t,tg−1)V (g)†. Here, V (g) is the unitary ma-
trix of eigenvectors of H(g)
c and the diagonal matrix
D(g)
ij (t,tg−1) = δij exp{−iω(g)
i (t− tg−1)} contains the
time evolution of the eigevalues. Using this result to-
gether withQg−1, the cumulative propagator up to time
tg−1, we can acquire the total time evolution operator at
time t from Uc(t) =Uc(t, 0) =Uc(t,tg−1)Qg−1. We then
substitute this relation into the deﬁnition of the control
matrix, Eq. (16), and obtain
˜Bαk(t) =s(g)
α tr
(
Q†
g−1V (g)D(g)†(t,tg−1)V (g)†Bα
× V (g)D(g)(t,tg−1)V (g)†Qg−1Ck
)
(33)
=:s(g)
α
∑
ij
¯B(g)
α,ij ¯C(g)
k,jieiΩ(g)
ij (t−tg−1), (34)
where Ω(g)
ij =ω(g)
i −ω(g)
j , ¯C(g)
k =V (g)†Qg−1CkQ†
g−1V (g),
and ¯B(g)
α =V (g)†BαV (g). Carrying out the Fourier trans-
form of Eq. (34) to get the frequency-domain control
matrix of the pulse generated by the Hamiltonian from
Eq. (32) is now straightforward since the integrals in-
volved are over simple exponential functions. We obtain
˜Bαk(ω) =
G∑
g=1
s(g)
α eiωtg−1 tr
([ ¯B(g)
α ◦I(g)(ω)
] ¯C(g)
k
)
(35)
with I(g)
ij (ω) =−i(ei(ω+Ω(g)
ij )∆tg− 1)/(ω + Ω(g)
ij ) and the
Hadamard product(A◦B)ij :=Aij·Bij. Equation (35) is
readily evaluated on a computer and thus enables the cal-
culation of ﬁlter functions of arbitrary control sequences,
either on its own or in conjunction with Eq. (29). A sim-
ilar expression is obtained for representations other than
the Liouville representation.
C. Calculating the frequency shifts
The frequency shifts∆αβ,kl in Eq. (17) correspond to
the second order of the ME and thus involve a double in-
tegral with a nested time dependence. This makes their
evaluation more involved than that of the decay ampli-
tudes Γαβ,kl and, in contrast to the previous section, we
cannot identify a concatenation rule or single out corre-
lation terms as in Eq. (31). However, we can still apply
the approximation of piecewise constant control and fol-
low a similar approach as in Section IIB2 to compute∆
in Fourier space. Since these terms correspond to a co-
herent gate error that can in principle be calibrated out
in experiments we will not go into much detail here.
We follow the arguments made above for the decay
amplitudes and express the cross-correlation functions
⟨bα(t)bβ(t′)⟩ by their Fourier transform, the spectral den-
sitySαβ(ω), using Eq. (23). Inserting this equation into
the deﬁnition of the frequency shifts in the time domain,
Eq. (20), yields
∆αβ,kl =
∫ ∞
−∞
dω
2πSαβ(ω)
∫ τ
0
dt ˜Bαk(t)e−iωt
×
∫ t
0
dt′ ˜Bβl(t′)eiωt′
. (36)
We again assume piecewise constant time segments so
that the inner time integral can be split up into a sum
of integrals over complete constant segments(tg′−1,tg′]
as well as a single integral that contains the last, incom-
plete segment up to timet. That is, taking the timet of
the outer integral to be within the interval(tg−1,tg] we
perform the replacement
∫ t
0
dt′→
g−1∑
g′=1
∫ tg′
tg′−1
dt′ +
∫ t
tg−1
dt′. (37)
We have thus divided our taskintotwo: Theﬁrstterm al-
lows, as before in Sections IIB1 and IIB2, to identify the
Fourier transform of the control matrix during time steps
g′ andg for both the inner and the outer integral accord-
ing to Eq. (35). The second term remains a nested double
integral, but now the integrand contains only products of
complex exponentials because we assume the control to
be constant within the limits of integration. As a next
step, we also replace the outer time integral by a sum of
integrals over single segments,
∫τ
0 dt→∑G
g=1
∫tg
tg−1
dt, to
obtain

10
∆αβ,kl =
∫ ∞
−∞
dω
2πSαβ(ω)
G∑
g=1
∫ tg
tg−1
dt e−iωt ˜Bαk(t)



g−1∑
g′=1
∫ tg′
tg′−1
dt′ +
∫ t
tg−1
dt′


 eiωt′
˜Bβl(t′). (38)
Before continuing, we ease notation and deﬁne˜B(ω) =:∑
gG(g)(ω) withG(g)(ω) obtained from Eq. (35) and further-
more adopt the Einstein summation convention for the remainder of this section, meaning multiple subscript indices
that appear on only one side of an equality are summed over implicitly. We now proceed like in Section IIB2 and
make use of the piecewise constant approximation to diagonalize the control Hamiltonian during each segment. For
the nested integrals, we obtain˜Bαk(t) from Eq. (34), whereas the remaining integrals factorize and we can identify
the Fourier transformed quantityG(g)(ω). Equation (38) then becomes
∆αβ,kl =
∫ ∞
−∞
dω
2πSαβ(ω)
G∑
g=1

G(g)∗
αk (ω)
g−1∑
g′=1
G(g′)
βl (ω) +s(g)
α ¯B(g)
α,ij ¯C(g)
k,jiI(g)
ijmn(ω) ¯C(g)
l,nm ¯B(g)
β,mns(g)
β

 (39)
with ¯B(g)
α,ij, ¯C(g)
k,ij, Ω(g)
ij as deﬁned above in Section IIB2 and
I(g)
ijmn(ω) =
∫ tg
tg−1
dt eiΩ(g)
ij (t−tg−1)−iωt
∫ t
tg−1
dt′ eiΩ(g)
mn(t′−tg−1)+iωt′
. (40)
Explicit results for the integration in Eq. (40) are given
in Appendix A2. To calculate the frequency shifts ∆,
we can thus reuse the quantityG(g)(ω) also required for
the decay amplitudes Γ. The only additional computa-
tion, apart from contraction, involves theG integrations
I(g)
ijmn(ω). Importantly, Eq. (39) has the same structure
as the corresponding Eq. (24) forΓ in that the individ-
ual entries of∆ are given by an integral over the spectral
density of the noise multiplied with a – in this case second
order – ﬁlter function that describes the susceptibility to
noise at frequencyω:
∆αβ,kl =
∫ ∞
−∞
dω
2πSαβ(ω)F (2)
αβ,kl(ω). (41)
D. Computing derived quantities
By means of Eqs. (29), (35) and (39), one can obtain
the cumulant functionK(τ) from Eq. (17) and hence the
error process ⟨ ˜U(τ)⟩ from Eq. (9) for an arbitrary se-
quence of gates. From this, several quantities of interest
for the characterization of a given control operation can
be extracted. We explicitly review the average gate and
state ﬁdelities as well as expressions to quantify leakage
here, but emphasize that this is not exhaustive. Because
for many applications the noise is weak and hence the
parameterξ≪ 1, we will in the following expand the ex-
ponential in Eq. (7) to leading order inξ in the following.
That is, we approximate (remember thatK(τ)∈O
(
ξ2)
)
⟨ ˜U(τ)⟩≈ 1 +K(τ). (42)
For Gaussian noise, higher order corrections can be ob-
tained either by explicitly calculating higher powers ofK
or by numerically evaluating the exponential of the cu-
mulant function. The former method often leads to sim-
pler expressions than Eq. (17) for which the trace tensor
Tijkl need not be computed directly. In the weak-noise
regime, one can also deﬁne speciﬁc ﬁlter functions for
each derived quantity that are given in terms of linear
combinations of the generalized ﬁlter functionsFαβ,kl(ω).
The ensemble expectation value of the quantity can then
be obtained directly from the overlap with the spectral
density,
∫
dω/2π F(ω)S(ω). Finally, we will drop the av-
eraging brackets and the argument of the error transfer
matrix ⟨ ˜U(τ)⟩ for brevity in the following.
1. Average gate and entanglement ﬁdelity
The average gate ﬁdelity is a commonly quoted ﬁg-
ure of merit used to characterize physical gate imple-
mentations [5, 8, 68–70]. It represents the ﬁdelity be-
tween an implementationU and the ideal gateQ aver-
aged over the uniform Haar measure. SinceFavg(U,Q) =
Favg(Q†◦U , 1) =Favg( ˜U), the average gate ﬁdelity can
be obtained from the error channel˜U as [71, 72]
Favg( ˜U) = tr ˜U +d
d(d + 1) (43)
= d×F e( ˜U) + 1
d + 1 , (44)
where d is the system dimension andFe( ˜U) = tr ˜U/d2 is
the entanglement ﬁdelity. In the low-noise regime where
Eq. (42) holds, we can write the entanglement ﬁdelity in

11
terms of the cumulant functionKαβ approximately as
Fe( ˜U) = 1 + 1
d2
∑
αβ
trKαβ (45)
=: 1−
∑
αβ
Iαβ( ˜U). (46)
Here, we deﬁnedIαβ, the inﬁdelity due to a pair of noise
sources (α,β ). As we show in Appendix A3, we can
simplify the trace of the cumulant function so that the
inﬁdelity reads
Iαβ = 1
d tr Γαβ. (47)
Equation(47)reducestoEq.(32)fromRef.28forasingle
qubit (d = 2) and pure dephasing noise up to a diﬀerent
normalization convention; by pulling the trace through
to the generalized ﬁlter functionFαβ,kl(ω) in Eq. (24),
we recover the relation (settingα =β for simplicity)
Iα = 1
d
∫ ∞
−∞
dω
2πSα(ω)Fα(ω) (48)
with the ﬁdelity ﬁlter functionFα(ω) given by Eq. (26).
Notably, only the decay amplitudesΓ contribute to the
ﬁdelity to leading order since the frequency shifts∆ are
antisymmetric and therefore vanish under the trace.
2. State ﬁdelity and measurements
In the context of quantum information processing we
are often interested in the probability of measuring the
expected state during readout. We can extract this pro-
jective readout probability from the transfer matrix in
Eq. (7) by inspecting the transition probability, or state
ﬁdelity, between a pure stateρ =|ψ⟩⟨ψ| and an arbitrary
stateσ that evolves according to the quantum operation
E : σ→E (σ). Using the double braket notation intro-
duced at the beginning of Section II we then deﬁne the
state ﬁdelity as
F(|ψ⟩,U(σ)) = tr(ρE(σ))
=⟨⟨ρ|E(σ)⟩⟩
=⟨⟨ρ|E|σ⟩⟩,
(49)
where we have expressed the density matrices by vectors
on the Liouville spaceL andE as a transfer matrix. We
can thus calculate arbitrary pure state ﬁdelities by sim-
ple matrix-vector multiplications of the transfer matrices
E =Q ˜U andthevectorizeddensitymatrices |ρ⟩⟩and|σ⟩⟩.
In Section VC we employ this measure to simulate a RB
experiment where return probabilities are of interest so
thatF(|ψ⟩,E(ρ)) =⟨⟨ρ|Q ˜U|ρ⟩⟩.
General measurements can be incorporated in the
superoperator formalism we have employed here in a
straightforward manner using the positive operator-
valued measure (POVM) formalism [49, 73]. POVMs
constitute a set of Hermitian, positive semideﬁnite op-
erators{Ei}i (in contrast to the projective measurement
{|ψ⟩⟨ψ|, 1−|ψ⟩⟨ψ|}) that fulﬁll the completeness relation∑
iEi = 1 and in the double braket notation may be
represented as the row vectors{⟨⟨Ei|}i in Liouville space.
Consequently, the measurement probability for outcome
Ei is given by⟨⟨Ei|E(σ)⟩⟩ =⟨⟨Ei|E|σ⟩⟩if the system was
prepared in the stateσ and evolved according toE.
3. Leakage
In many physical implementations qubits are not en-
coded in real two-level systems but in two levels of a
larger Hilbert space (e.g. transmon [74] or singlet-triplet
[75] spin qubits) such that population can leak between
this computational subspace and other energy levels.
Thus, it is often of interest to quantify leakage when as-
sessinggateperformance. Recently, WoodandGambetta
[76] have suggested two separate measures for quantify-
ing leakage out of the computational subspace on the one
hand and seepage into the subspace on the other. With
the ﬁlter function formalism and the transfer matrix of
the error process given by Eqs. (7) and (17), we can easily
extract these quantities.
Using the deﬁnitions from Ref. 76 and the double
braket notation we can write the leakage rate generated
by a quantum operationE as
Lc(E) := 1
dc
⟨⟨Π𝓁|E| Πc⟩⟩ (50a)
and the seepage rate as
L𝓁(E) := 1
d𝓁
⟨⟨Πc|E| Π𝓁⟩⟩. (50b)
Here, Πc,𝓁 are projectors onto the computational and
leakage subspaces, respectively, anddc,𝓁 the correspond-
ing dimensions. For unital channels the leakage and seep-
age rates are not independent but satisfydcLc = d𝓁L𝓁
[76] so that we only need to consider one of the above
expressions here (c.f. Section IIA2).
Equations (50a) and (50b) can be used to determine
both coherent and incoherent leakage separately by sub-
stitutingQ or ˜U, respectively, forE. While the former is
due to systematic errors of the applied pulse and could
thus be corrected for by calibration, the latter is induced
by noise only. Alternatively, the leakage from both con-
tributions can also be determined collectively by substi-
tutingU forE.
III. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND
EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENTS
In this section we focus on computational aspects of
the formalism, remarking ﬁrst on several mathematical
simpliﬁcations that make the calculation of control ma-
trices and decay amplitudes more economical. Following

12
this, we investigate the computational complexity of the
method in comparison with Monte Carlo techniques and
show that our software implementation surpasses the lat-
ter’s performance in relevant parameter regimes.
A. Periodic Hamiltonians
If the control Hamiltonian is periodic, that isHc(t) =
Hc(t + T ), we can reduce the computational eﬀort of
calculating the control matrix by potentially orders of
magnitude (see Section VB for an application in Rabi
driving). We start by making the following observations:
First, the frequency domain control matrix of every pe-
riod of the control is the same so that˜B(g)(ω) = ˜B(1)(ω).
Moreover, eiω∆tg = e iωT for all g so that eiωtg−1 =
eiωT (g−1) andbythecompositionpropertyoftransferma-
tricesQ(g−1) =
[
Q(1)]g−1
where the superscript without
parentheses denotes matrix power. We can then simplify
Eq. (29) to read
˜B(ω) = ˜B(1)(ω)
G−1∑
g=0
[
eiωTQ(1)
]g
. (51)
Furthermore, if the matrix 1− eiωTQ(1) is invertible,
which is typically the case for the vast majority of values
of ω, the previous expression can be rewritten as
˜B(ω) = ˜B(1)(ω)
(
1− eiωTQ(1)
)−1(
1−
[
eiωTQ(1)]G)
(52)
by evaluating the sum as a ﬁnite Neumann series. Equa-
tion (52) oﬀers a signiﬁcant performance beneﬁt over reg-
ular concatenation in the case of many periodsG as we
will show in Section IIID. Beyond numerical advantages,
it also provides an analytic method for studying ﬁlter
functions of periodic driving Hamiltonians.
B. Extending Hilbert spaces
Examining Eq. (16), we can see that the columns of
the control matrix and therefore also the ﬁlter function
are invariant (up to normalization) under an extension of
the Hilbert space. This allows parallelizing pulses with
precomputed control matrices in a very resource-eﬃcient
manner if one chooses a suitable operator basis. Note
that the same also applies to other representations of
quantum operations.
Suppose we extend the Hilbert spaceH1 of a gate for
which we have already computed the control matrix by
a second Hilbert spaceH2 so that H12 = H1⊗ H2. If
we can ﬁnd an operator basis whose elements separate
into tensor products themselves, i.e.C12 =C1⊗C 2 as for
the Pauli basis (c.f. Section IIIC), the control matrix of
the composite gate deﬁned onH12 has the same non-
trivial columns as that of the original gate onH1 up to
a diﬀerent normalization factor. The remaining columns
are simply zero. This is because the trace over a tensor
productfactorsintotracesovertheindividualsubsystems
so that ˜Bαk(t)∝ tr
(
[U†
1⊗U†
2][Bα⊗1][U1⊗U2][1⊗Ck]
)
=
tr
(
U†
1BαU11
)
tr
(
U†
2 1U2Ck
)
= 0 since we assumed that
the noise operatorsBα are traceless (c.f. Section IIA2).
Generalizing this result to multiple originally disjoint
Hilbert spaces we write the composite space as H =⨂
i Hi and the corresponding basis asC =⨂
iCi. The
control matrix of the composite pulse on H is then a
combination of the columns of the control matrices on
Hi for noise operatorsBα that are non-trivial, i.e. not
the identity, only on their original space. For noise op-
erators deﬁned on more than one subspace, e.g.Bij =
Bi⊗Bj,Bi∈ Hi,Bj∈ Hj, this does not hold anymore
and the corresponding row in the composite control ma-
trix needs to be computed from scratch.
One can thus reuse precomputed control matrices be-
yond the concatenation laid out above when studying
multi-qubit pulses or algorithms. For concreteness, con-
sider a set of one- and two-qubit pulses whose control ma-
trices have been precomputed. We can then remap those
control matrices to any other qubit in a larger register if
the entire Hilbert space is deﬁned by the tensor product
of the single-qubit Hilbert spaces, and even map the con-
trol matrices of two diﬀerent pulses to the same time slot
on diﬀerent qubits. Thus, we do not need to perform the
possibly costly computation of the control matrices again
but instead only need to remap the columns of˜B to the
equivalent basis elements in the basis of the complete
Hilbert space, making the assembly of algorithms that
consist of a limited set of gates which are used at several
points in the algorithm more eﬃcient. In Section VD we
simulate a four-qubit QFT algorithm making use of the
shortcuts described here.
C. Operator bases
Up to this point, we have not explicitly speciﬁed the
basis that deﬁnes the Liouville representation. The only
conditions imposed by Eq. (14) are orthonormality with
respect to the Hilbert-Schmidt product and that the ba-
sis elements are Hermitian. Yet, the choice of operator
basis can have a large impact on the time it takes to
compute the control matrix as discussed in the previous
section. We therefore give a short overview over two pos-
sible choices in the following. As we are mostly interested
in the computational properties, we represent linear op-
erators in L(H ) as matrices onCd×d.
Then-qubit Pauli basis fulﬁlls the requirements set by
Eq. (14) and furthermore allows for the simpliﬁcations
described before. In our normalization convention where
⟨Ci,Ci⟩ = 1 it can be written as
{σi}d2−1
i=0 =
{ 1√
2, σx√
2, σy√
2, σz√
2
}⊗n
(53)
with the Pauli matricesσx,σy and σz . While it is ob-
vious that it is separable, meaning it factors into tensor

13
products of the single-qubit Pauli matrices, the dimen-
sion of the Pauli basis is restricted to powers of two, i.e.
d = 2n. An operator basis without this restriction is
the generalized Gell-Mann (GGM) basis [77, 78]. In the
following we will discuss optimizations pertaining to this
basis that are also implemented in the software (see Sec-
tion IV).
The GGM matrices are a generalization of the Gell-
Mann matrices known from particle physics to arbitrary
dimensions. In our normalization convention, the basis
(excluding the identity element) is given by [79]
{Λi}d2−1
i=1 ={ujk,vjk,wl}j,k,l (54)
with
ujk = 1√
2 (|j⟩⟨k| +|k⟩⟨j|), (54a)
vjk =− i√
2 (|j⟩⟨k|−| k⟩⟨j|), (54b)
wl = 1√
l(l + 1)
( l∑
m=1
|m⟩⟨m|− l|l + 1⟩⟨l + 1|
)
, (54c)
for 1 ≤ j < k ≤ d, 1 ≤ l ≤ d− 1, and an or-
thonormal vector basis {|j⟩}d
j=1 of the Hilbert space.
Expanding an arbitrary matrix A ∈ Cd×d in the ba-
sis of Eq. (54) is then simply a matter of adding up
the corresponding matrix elements of A according to
Eqs. (54a) to (54c). For instance, the expansion co-
eﬃcient for the ﬁrst symmetric basis element is given
by u12 = (A12|1⟩⟨2| +A21|2⟩⟨1|)
/√
2. The explicit con-
struction prescription of the GGM basis thus allows cal-
culating inner products of the form⟨Λj|A⟩ at constant
cost instead of the quadratic cost of the trace of a ma-
trix product, speeding up the computation of the transfer
matrix from Eq. (1) (in which caseA =E(Λk)). In nu-
merical experiments, calculating the transfer matrix of
a unitaryU with dimensiond and precomputed matrix
products Ak = UΛkU† scaled as∼ d4.16. This agrees
with the expected scaling of∼d4 (a transfer matrix has
d2×d2 elements) and presents a signiﬁcant improvement
over the explicit calculation with trace overlapstr(ΛjAk)
that we observed to scale as∼d5.93 (we expected∼d6).
Further inspection of the GGM basis additionally re-
veals an increasing sparsity for larged (the ﬁlling factor
scales roughly withd−2), so that it is well suited for com-
puting the trace tensor Eq. (18). Since this tensor has
d8 elements, the amount of memory required for a dense
representation becomes unreasonably large quite quickly.
To overcome this constraint, we can use a GGM basis in-
stead of a dense basis like the Pauli basis (which has a
ﬁlling factor of1/2). In this case, the resulting tensor
is also sparse because the overlap between diﬀerent basis
elements is small. This not only enables storing the ten-
sor in memory but also makes the calculation much faster
since one can employ algorithms optimized for operations
on sparse arrays (see Section IV).
As an illustration, consider a system of four qubits
so that the Hilbert space has dimension d = 2 4. An
operator basis for this space hasd2 = 2 8 elements and
consequently the tensor Tijkl has (28)4 = 2 32 entries.
Using 128 bitcomplex ﬂoats to represent the entries the
tensor would take up≈ 68 GB of memory in a dense
format. Conversely, for a GGM basis stored in a sparse
data structure, the resulting trace tensor only takes up≈
100 MBof memory. Furthermore, calculatingT takes≈
2.89 son an Intel® Core™ i9-9900K eight-core processor
since a GGM has a low ﬁlling factor. By contrast, the
same calculation with a Pauli basis takes≈ 217 s. This
is due to the larger ﬁlling factor on the one hand and
because sparse matrix multiplication algorithms perform
poorly with dense matrices on the other.
D. Computational complexity
In order to assess the performance of ﬁlter functions
(FF) for computing ﬁdelities compared to Monte Carlo
(MC) methods, we determine each method’s asymptotic
scaling behavior as a function of the system dimension
d. For the ﬁlter functions, we calculate the ﬁdelities
using Eqs. (26) and (48) in our software implementa-
tion, described in more detail in Section IV and hence
neglect contributions ofO
(
ξ4)
from the frequency shifts
∆. Additionally, we distinguish between three diﬀerent
approaches for calculating the control matrix; ﬁrst, for
a single pulse following Eq. (35), second for an arbitrary
sequence of pulses following Eq. (29), and third for a
periodic sequence of pulses following Eq. (52). For the
single pulse, we run benchmarks using exemplary values
for the various parameters on a machine with an AMD
FX™-6300 processor with six logical cores and24 GB of
memory. We also discuss the ﬁlter function method us-
ing left-right conjugation by unitaries instead of the Li-
ouville representation. The latter has higher memory
requirements and is expected to perform poorly for large
system dimensionsd since one deals withd2×d2 transfer
matrices on a Liouville space L instead of d×d uni-
taries on a Hilbert space H . In the software package,
the calculations are currently implemented in Liouville
space and calculation by conjugation is only partially
supported through the low-level API. However, both rep-
resentations perform similarly for small dimensions as we
show below. Note that for a fair performance comparison
the diﬀerent nature of errors needs to be kept in mind.
Monte Carlo becomes less costly if larger statistical errors
can be tolerated, whereas the ﬁlter function formalism is
typically limited by higher order errors. For reference,
the following considerations are summarized in Table I
for each approach and a representative set of parameters.
To calculate the ﬁdelity using MC, we generatenMC
diﬀerent noise traces that slice every time step∆t of
the pulse intonseg = fUV∆t segments to appropriately
sample the spectral density with fUV being the ultra-
violet cutoﬀ frequency. In total, there aren∆tnMCnseg

14
Method Dominating scaling Ex. values
MC (H ) n∆tnMCnseg(db +d3) 1 .3× 108
FF (L, explicit) n∆tnωnαd4 +n∆tdb+2 2.4× 107
FF (H , explicit) n∆tnωnα(d2 +db) 1 .4× 107
FF (L, concat.) Gnωnαd4 +Gd2b 2.4× 106
FF (H , concat.) Gnωnαdb 7.8× 105
FF (L, periodic) nω(nαd4 +d2b +d2b logG) 1 .0× 105
Table I. Complexity scaling of the three approaches for cal-
culating average gate ﬁdelities discussed in the text. “FF
(explicit)” stands for calculating ﬁlter functions from scratch
following Eq. (35), “FF (concat.)” for sequences following
Eq. (29), and “FF (periodic)” for periodic Hamiltonians fol-
lowing Eq. (52). H and L designate the vector space on
which calculations are performed. Example values for the
dominant contributions listed in the table are given for matrix
multiplication exponentb = 2.376, dimensiond = 2, number
of time stepsn∆t = 1000, and number of gatesG = 100 (cor-
responding to a sequence of 100 single-qubit gates with 10
time steps each) with the remaining parameters as in Fig. 2.
For increasingd the computational advantage of FF (L) over
MC diminishes but is conserved for FF (H ).
noise samples for each of which the Hamiltonian is diag-
onalized, exponentiated, and the resulting propagators
multiplied to get the ﬁnal, noisy unitary. The entan-
glement ﬁdelity is then obtained by averaging the trace
overlap tr
(
Q†U
)/
d of ideal and noisy unitary over all
noise realizations. Taking the complexity of matrix di-
agonalization to beO
(
d3)
and matrix multiplication to
beO
(
db)
withb = 3 for a naive algorithm andb = 2.376
for the Coppersmith-Winograd algorithm [80], we expect
MC to scale with the dimension d of the problem as
∼ n∆tnMCnseg(db +d3). For simplicity, we use a white
noise spectrum for whichS(ω) = const . but note that
sampling arbitrary spectra induces additional overhead
for MC, depending on which method is used to gener-
ate the noise traces. Typical time-domain methods in-
clude the simulation of the underlying physical process
(like two-state ﬂuctuators) or the application of an in-
verse Fourier transform to white noise multiplied by a
frequency-domain transfer function.
By contrast, the computational cost of the ﬁlter func-
tion formalism as realized by Eq. (35) is independent of
the form of the spectrum. For this approach we ﬁnd the
leading terms to scale as∼n∆tnωnαd4+n∆tdb+2 withnα
the number of noise operators andnω the number of fre-
quency samples. Here, the ﬁrst term is due to the trace in
Eq. (35) which boils down to the trace of a matrix prod-
uct, ∑
ijAijBji, that scales with d2 and is performed
once for each of thed2 basis elements,nα noise opera-
tors, n∆t time steps, andnω frequency points. The sec-
ond term is due to the transformationCk→ ¯C(g)
k which
requires multiplication ofd×d matrices for every time
step and basis element. As nαnω < nMCnseg for real-
istic parameters because the ultraviolet cutoﬀ frequency
needs to be chosen suﬃciently high and the relative error
of the method decreases with1
/√nMC, we expect that
in the case of a single pulse the ﬁlter function formal-
ism in Liouville representation should outperform Monte
Carlo calculations for reasonably small dimensionsd. Us-
ingleft-rightconjugation, thisadvantageshouldholdalso
for larged. In this case the Hadamard product (∼d2) as
well as matrix multiplication (∼ db) are carried out for
each frequency, noise operator, and time step to calculate
the interaction picture noise operators ¯Bα(ω). We thus
ﬁnd this method to scale with∼n∆tnωnα(d2 +db).
Figure 2 shows exemplary wall times for both methods
and d∈ [2, 120] that conﬁrm our expectation. Only for
about d≈ 100 the overhead from the extra time steps
and trajectories over which is averaged is compensated
for MC. For smaller dimensions the calculation using FFs
is faster by almost two orders of magnitude (see the inset
showing the same data in a log-log plot). The lines show
ﬁts tot = adb. The data is not quite in the asymptotic
regime due to limited memory so that even for large di-
mensiontermsoflowerpowerin dcontributesigniﬁcantly
to the run time. Even though this causes the ﬁts to un-
derestimate the exponentb, the general trend agrees with
our expectation. Note that the crossover does not always
occur at the same dimensiond. On a diﬀerent system
with an Intel® Core™ i9-9900K eight-core processor the
FF method outperformed MC even ford = 120 beyond
which available memory limited the simulation.
Quantifying the performance gain from using the con-
trol matrices’ concatenation property to calculate ﬁdeli-
ties of gate sequences is more diﬃcult since it strongly
depends on the number of gates occurring multiple times
in the sequence (enabling reuse of precomputed con-
trol matrices) as well as the complexity of the individ-
ual gates. The evaluation using the concatenation rule
Eq. (29) performs asymptotically worse than the eval-
uation for a complete pulse according to Eq. (35) be-
cause of higher powers ofd dominating the calculation
in the former case. Performing theG matrix multiplica-
tions ˜B(g)(ω)Q(g−1) fromEq.(29)isoforder ∼Gnωnαd4,
with G the number of pulses in the sequence. Further-
more, calculating the transfer matrix of the total prop-
agators Qg−1 involves multiplication ofd×d matrices
for all d4 combinations of basis elements amounting to
∼ Gdb+4. In case the Liouville representation of the in-
dividual pulses’ total propagatorsPg, P(g), have been
precomputed, the latter computation can be made more
eﬃcient since one can just propagate the transfer matri-
cesP(g) to obtain the cumulative transfer matrices for
the sequence,Q(g) =∏0
g′=gQ(g′), at cost∼ Gd2b. The
restriction to small dimensions does not apply for con-
jugation by unitaries as in this case the matrix multi-
plications involved×d matrices and we do not have to
compute the Liouville representation. We thus obtain a
more favorable asymptotic scaling of∼Gnωnαdb.
Utilizing the concatenation property in the Liouville
representation thus corresponds to eﬀectively reducing
the number of times the calculations scaling with ∼
nωnαd4 have to be carried out but incurs additional cal-

15
100 101 102
d
10−5
10−3
10−1
101
103
t (s)
0 50 100
FF (L ): O(d4.11)
FF (H ): O(d2.23)
MC: O(d2.50)
0
100
Figure 2. Performance of the formalism using Eq. (35) com-
pared to a Monte Carlo method for a single gate as a func-
tion of problem dimensiond. Parameters are:n∆t = 1,nα =
3,n MC = 100,f UV = 10 2/
∆t,n ω = 500 wherenα is the num-
ber of noise operators considered,nMC the number of Monte
Carlo trajectories over which is averaged, andnω the number
of frequency samples. The calculation using ﬁlter functions
clearly outperforms MC for small system sizes. For dimen-
sions larger than d≈ 100 (roughly equivalent to 7 qubits)
Monte Carlo (blue squares) performs better than the FF cal-
culation with transfer matrices (green triangles) for this set
of parameters and processor due to the better scaling behav-
ior. Using conjugation by unitaries (orange diamonds) signif-
icantly outperforms MC also for large dimensions. While the
ﬁts tot = adb (lines) underestimate the leading order expo-
nent due to the data not being in the asymptotic regime, they
support the expected relationship of complexity between the
approaches. The inset shows the same data on a linear scale,
highlighting the diﬀerent scaling behaviors for larged.
culations scaling with∼ d2b. Accordingly, it provides a
performance beneﬁt if a sequence consists of either very
complex pulses, in which case single repetitions already
make the calculation much more eﬃcient, or of few pulses
that occur many times. In the extremal case ofG repe-
titions of a single gate the beneﬁt of employing the con-
catenation property is most pronounced and can be im-
proved even further utilizing the simpliﬁcations laid out
inSectionIIIA.Sincematrixinversionhasthesamecom-
plexity as matrix multiplication and taking a matrix to
theG-th power requiresO(logG) matrix multiplications,
Eq. (52) should scale with∼nω(nαd4 +d2b +d2b logG)
(the ﬁrst two terms are due to the ﬁnal matrix multi-
plications and are independent ofG). It hence allows
for a vast speedup over Eq. (29) in that the asymptotic
behavior as a function of the number of gates changes
from∼G to∼ logG. An example of this is presented in
Section VB for the context of Rabi driving. Note that
this closed form is a unique feature of the transfer ma-
trix representation and not applicable to conjugation by
unitaries.
IV. SOFTWARE IMPLEMENTATION
In this section we give an overview over the
filter_functions software package implementing the
main features of the formalism derived above. This in-
cludes the calculation of the decay amplitudesΓ and ﬁ-
delities as well as the calculation of the control matrices
for single gates and both generic and periodic sequences
of gates. Moreover, control matrices may be eﬃciently
extended to and merged on larger Hilbert spaces. Cal-
culations using unitary conjugation instead of transfer
matrices are implemented but at this point not available
in the high-level API.
Our software is written in Python and available on
GitHub [41] under the GPLv3 license. We also provide
a current snapshot in the Supplementary Material [81].
It features a broad coverage through unit tests and ex-
tensive API documentation as well as didactic examples
(see Section V). The package relies on theNumPy [82] and
SciPy [83] libraries for vectorized array operations. Data
visualization is handled bymatplotlib [84]. For tensor
multiplications with optimized contraction order we use
opt_einsum [85] for whichsparse [86], a library aiming
to extend theSciPy sparse module to multi-dimensional
arrays, serves as a backend in the calculation of the trace
tensor from Eq. (18). Lastly, the package is written to
interface with qopt [43, 87] and QuTiP [42], frameworks
for the simulation and optimization of open quantum sys-
tems, and mirrors the latter’s data structure for Hamil-
tonians ensuring easy interoperability between the two.
A. Package overview
In the filter_functions package all operations are
understood as sequences of pulses that are applied to a
quantum system. These pulses are represented by in-
stances of thePulseSequence class which holds informa-
tion about the physical system (control and noise Hamil-
tonians) as well as the mathematical description (e.g. the
basis used for the Liouville representation). As indicated
above, the HamiltoniansHc(t) and Hn(t) are given in a
similar structure as inQuTiP. That is, a Hamiltonian is
expressed as a sum of Hermitian operators with the time
dependence encoded in piecewise constant coeﬃcients so
that
Hc(t) =
∑
i
a(g)
i Ai = const. (55a)
Hn(t) =
∑
α
s(g)
α Bα = const. (55b)
for t ∈ (tg−1,tg],g ∈ {1,...,G } and where the a(g)
i
are the amplitudes of thei-th control ﬁeld. Note that
the noise variablesbα(t) are missing from Eq. (55b) be-
cause they are captured by the spectral densityS(ω).
In the software, Eqs. (55a) and (55b) are represented
as lists whose i-th element corresponds to a sublist of

16
two elements: thei-th operator and thei-th coeﬃcients
[a(0)
i ,...,a (G)
i ].
The PulseSequence class provides methods to calcu-
late and cache the ﬁlter function according to Eq. (30).
Alternatively, ﬁlter functions may also be cached man-
ually to permit using the package with analytical solu-
tions for the control matrix. Concatenation of pulses
is implemented by the functions concatenate() and
concatenate_periodic() which will attempt to use the
cached attributes of the PulseSequence instances rep-
resenting the pulses to eﬃciently calculate the ﬁlter
function of the composite pulse following Eq. (29) and
Eq. (52), respectively.
Operator bases fulﬁlling Eq. (14) are implemented by
the Basis class. There are two predeﬁned types of bases:
1. Pauli bases forn = 2d qubits from Eq. (53) and
2. generalized Gell-Mann (GGM) bases of arbitrary
dimension d from Eq. (54).
The Pauli basis is both unitary and separable while the
GGM basis is sparse for large dimensions but neither uni-
tary nor separable. As mentioned in Section IIIB (see
also Section VD), using a separable basis can provide
signiﬁcant performance beneﬁts for calculating the ﬁlter
functions of algorithms. On the other hand, a sparse ba-
sis makes the calculation of the trace tensorTijkl and
therefore also of the error transfer matrix˜U much faster
(c.f. Section IIIC). Additionally, the user can deﬁne cus-
tom bases using the class constructor.
The error transfer matrix ˜U can be calculated
for a given pulse and noise spectrum using the
error_transfer_matrix() function [88]. Various other
quantities can be computed from ˜U as outlined in Sec-
tion IID. Furthermore, the package includes a plotting
module that oﬀers several functions, e.g. for the visual-
ization of ﬁlter functions or the evolution of the Bloch
vector using QuTiP.
B. Workﬂow
We now give a short introduction into the workﬂow of
the filter_functions package by showing how to cal-
culate the dephasing ﬁlter function of a simple Hahn spin
echo sequence [89] as an example. The sequence consists
of a singleπ-pulse of ﬁnite duration around thex-axis
of the Bloch sphere in between two periods of free evo-
lution. We can hence divide the control ﬁelds into three
constant segments and write the control Hamiltonian as
H(SE)
c (t) = σx
2 ·
{
π/tπ , if τ≤t<τ +tπ
0, otherwise (56)
with τ the duration of the free evolution period andtπ
that of theπ pulse. For the noise Hamiltonian we only
need to deﬁne the deterministic time dependencesα(t)
and operators Bα since the noise strength is captured
by the spectrum S(ω). Thus we have sz(t) = 1 and
Bz = σz/2 for pure dephasing noise that couples linearly
to the system.
In the software, we ﬁrst deﬁne aPulseSequence object
representing the spin echo (SE) sequence. As was already
mentioned, the control and noise Hamiltonians are given
asalistcontaininglistsforeverycontrolornoiseoperator
thatisconsidered. Thesesublistsconsistoftherespective
operator as aNumPy array or QuTiP Qobj and the ampli-
tudes (a(g)
i or s(g)
α ) in an iterable data structure such as
a list. We can hence instantiate thePulseSequence with
the following code:
import filter_functions as ff
import qutip as qt
from math import pi
tau, t_pi = (1, 1e-3)
# Control Hamiltonian for pi rotation in 2nd time step
H_c = [[qt.sigmax()/2, [0, pi/t_pi, 0]]]
# Pure dephasing noise Hamiltonian with linear coupling
H_n = [[qt.sigmaz()/2, [1, 1, 1]]]
# Durations of piecewise constant segments
dt = [tau, t_pi, tau]
ECHO = ff.PulseSequence(H_c, H_n, dt)
where a basis is automatically chosen since we did not
specify it in the constructor in the last line. Calculating
theﬁlterfunctionofthepulseforagivenfrequencyvector
omega can then be achieved by calling
F = ECHO.get_filter_function(omega)
where F is the dephasing ﬁlter functionFzz(ω) as we
only deﬁned a single noise operator. Finally, we calculate
the error transfer matrix˜U for the noise spectral density
Szz(ω) =ω−2,
S = 1/omega**2
U = ff.error_transfer_matrix(ECHO, S, omega)
This code uses the control matrix previously cached when
the ﬁlter function was ﬁrst computed. Therefore, only
the integration in Eq. (24) and the calculation of the
trace tensor in Eq. (18) are carried out in the last line.
An alternative approach to calculate the spin echo ﬁl-
ter function is to employ the concatenation property. For
this, we interpret the SE as a sequence consisting of three
separate pulses. Each of the pulses has a single time seg-
ment during which a constant control is applied and con-
catenating the separatePulseSequence instances yields
the PulseSequence representing a spin echo. This way
analytic control matrices may be used to calculate the
control matrix of the composite sequence. Pulses can be
concatenated by using either the concatenate() func-
tion or the overloaded@ operator:
# Define PulseSequence objects as shown above
FID = ff.PulseSequence(...)
NOT = ff.PulseSequence(...)
# Cache the analytic control matrices at frequency omega
FID.cache_control_matrix(omega, B_FID)
NOT.cache_control_matrix(omega, B_NOT)
# Concatenate the pulses
ECHO = FID @ NOT @ FID

17
Since we have cached the control matrices of theFID and
NOT pulses, that of theECHO object is also automatically
calculated and stored. Concatenating PulseSequence
objects is implemented as an arithmetic operator of the
class to reﬂect the intrinsic composition property of the
control matrices.
Further development of the software has focused on
making it available in a gate optimization and simulation
framework [43, 87]. Besides using it to compute decoher-
ence eﬀects and ﬁdelities, analytic derivatives of the ﬁlter
functions have been implemented to allow for optimizing
pulse parameters in the presence of non-Markovian noise
within the framework of quantum optimal control [90].
Additionally, building an interface withqupulse [91,
92], a software toolkit for parametrizing and sequencing
control pulses and relaying them to control hardware,
would implement the capability to compute ﬁlter func-
tions of pulses assembled inqupulse, thereby allowing a
user in the lab to easily inspect the noise susceptibility
characteristics of the pulse they are currently applying
to their device.
V. EXAMPLE APPLICATIONS
We now present example applications of the software
package and the formalism. As stated before, we focus
on the decay amplitudesΓ and its associated ﬁlter func-
tions and assume that the unitary errors generated by
the frequency shifts ∆ are either small (as is the case
for gate ﬁdelities) or calibrated out. All of the exam-
ples shown below are part of the software documentation
as either interactive Jupyter notebooks [93] or Python
scripts. In the following, we give angular frequencies and
energies in units of inverse times (e.g.s−1) while ordinary
frequencies are given inHz and we write⟨ ˜U(τ)⟩ = ˜U for
legibility.
A. Singlet-triplet two-qubit gates
In order to benchmark ﬁdelity predictions of our im-
plementation as well as demonstrate its application to
nontrivial pulses, we compute the ﬁrst-order inﬁdelity of
the two-qubit gates presented in Ref. 94 and compare
the results to the reference’s Monte Carlo calculations.
There, a numerically optimized gate set consisting of
{Xπ/2⊗I, Yπ/2⊗I, CNOT}forexchange-coupledsinglet-
triplet spin qubits is introduced, taking into account dif-
ferent noise spectra and realistic control hardware.
For readers unfamiliar with the reference we brieﬂy
summarize the physical system and noise model entering
the optimization. The authors consider four electrons
conﬁned in a linear array of four quantum dots in a semi-
conductor heterostructure. Each electroni∈{ 1, 2, 3, 4}
experiences a diﬀerent static magnetic ﬁeldBi so that
there is a gradientbij = Bi−Bj between two adjacent
dotsiandj. Thisgivesrisetospinquantizationalongthe
magnetic ﬁeld axis and deﬁnes the eigenstates{|↑↓⟩,|↓↑⟩}
that span the computational subspace of a single qubit
so that the accessible Hilbert space of the two-qubit sys-
tem is spanned by{|↑↓⟩,|↓↑⟩}⊗2. The magnitude of the
exchange interaction Jij between two adjacent dots i
and j is controlled via gate electrodes located on top of
the heterostructure that can be pulsed on a nanosecond
timescale with an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG).
Changing the gate voltages changes the detuningϵij of
the electrochemical potential between dots and in turn
leads to a change in exchange coupling according to the
phenomenological modelJij(ϵij)∝ exp(ϵij).
The pulses are deﬁned by a set of discrete detuning
voltages ϵij passed to an AWG with a sample rate of
1 GS/s and constant magnetic ﬁeld gradientsbij are as-
sumed. To reﬂect the fact that the qubits experience a
diﬀerent pulse than what is programmed into the AWG
due to cable dispersion and non-ideal control hardware,
the detunings are convoluted with an experimental im-
pulse response [94]. Finally, the signal is discretized as
piecewise constant by slicing each segment into ﬁve steps,
yielding a time increment of∆t = 0.2 ns.
To ﬁnd optimal detuning pulses, a Levenberg-
Marquardt algorithm iteratively minimizes the inﬁdelity,
leakage, and trace distance from the target unitary. For
the inﬁdelity, contributions from quasistatic magnetic
ﬁeld noise as well as quasistatic and white charge noise
are taken into account during each iteration. Because
treating colored (correlated) noise using Monte Carlo
methodsiscomputationallyexpensive(c.f.SectionIIID),
the inﬁdelity due to fast1/f-like noise is only computed
for the ﬁnal gate and not used during the optimization.
Two-qubit interactions are mediated via the exchange
J23 that makes the states|↑↑↓↓⟩ and|↓↓↑↑⟩ accessible.
They constitute levels outside of the computational sub-
space that ideally should only be occupied during an en-
tangling gate operation. A non-vanishing population of
these states after the operation has ended is therefore un-
wanted and considered leakage, the magnitude of which
we could quantify following Section IID3. However, here
we limit ourselves to determine the inﬁdelity contribution
from fast, viz. non-quasistatic, charge noise entering the
system through ϵij. That is, we consider noise sources
α∈{ ϵ12,ϵ 23,ϵ 34}. We take the non-linear dependence
of the Hamiltonian on the detuningsϵij into account by
setting sϵij(t) = ∂Jij(ϵij(t))/∂ϵij(t)∝Jij(ϵij(t)).
Figure 3 shows the ﬁltered (convoluted) exchange in-
teraction Jij between each pair of dots during the pulse
sequence in panel (a) and ﬁlter functions plotted as func-
tion of frequency in panel (b) for the three diﬀerent de-
tunings. For a detailed description on how the ﬁlter func-
tions were computed in the presence of additional leak-
age levels refer to Appendix B. As one would expect from
the fact that the intermediate (inter-qubit) exchange in-
teraction J23 (orange dash-dotted lines) is only turned
on for short times to entangle the qubits, the ﬁlter func-
tion forϵ23 is smaller by roughly an order of magnitude
than the intra-qubit exchange ﬁlter functions. Notably,

18
the ﬁlter functions forϵ12 and ϵ34 show clear character-
istics of DCGs, that is they drop to zero asω→ 0, and
decouple from quasistatic noise with an error suppres-
sion∝ ω2. This is not unexpected as the optimization
minimizesquasistaticnoisecontributionstotheinﬁdelity.
In addition, one can also observe small oscillations with
period 5 ns−1 in frequency space that arise as a numer-
ical artifact of the piecewise constant discretization of
the control parameters as investigations have shown. If
high-frequency spectral components are expected to play
a signiﬁcant role, one needs to be aware of these eﬀects
and adjust the simulation parameters appropriately.
The inset of Fig. 3(b) shows the same ﬁlter functions
for the DC tail on a linear scale. Most notably, Fϵ12
and Fϵ34 have maxima around ω = 2 π/τ, i.e. exactly
the frequency matching the pulse duration, and around
ω = 50/τ = 1 ns−1 with τCNOT = 50 ns. The former is
the typical window in which a pulse is most susceptible
to noise whereas the latter matches the absolute value of
the magnetic ﬁeld gradients,b12 =−b34 = 1 ns−1, indi-
cating that the peak corresponds to the qubit dynamics
generated by the magnetic ﬁeld gradients. Panels (c)–
(e) show the cumulant functionsKϵij(τ) of the detuning
error channelsϵij on the computational subspace.Kϵ12
displays clear characteristics of a Pauli channel with only
elements on the diagonal and secondary diagonals deviat-
ingfromzerosigniﬁcantlywhereas Kϵ34 (thetargetqubit)
possesses a more complicated structure.
We now compute the inﬁdelity contribution originating
fromfastchargenoiseusingEq.(43)buttracingonlyover
the computational subspace to compare to the Monte
Carlo calculations of Ref. 94 (see Appendix B for fur-
ther details). Like the reference, we use a noise spectrum
Sϵ,a(f)∝ 1/fa with Sϵ,a(1 MHz) = 4× 10−20 V2 Hz−1
and consider white noise (a = 0) and correlated noise
with a = 0.7 [10] with infrared and ultraviolet cutoﬀs
1/τ and 100 ns−1, respectively. Table II compares the
results in this work with the reference. The values com-
puted here are consistent with the more elaborate Monte
Carlo calculations within a few percent. Notably, the de-
viation is smaller for the smaller noise levels witha = 0.7,
in line with the fact that we have only computed the
contributions from the decay amplitudesΓ and thus the
leading order perturbation. If we had additionally eval-
uated the frequency shifts∆ we could have obtained the
exact ﬁdelity in the case of Gaussian noise.
B. Rabi driving
A widely used method for qubit control is Rabi driv-
ing [8, 13, 26, 95]. If we restrict ourselves to the resonant
case for simplicity, the control Hamiltonian takes on the
general formHc = ω0σz/2 +A sin(ω0t +φ)σx. Here,ω0
is the resonance frequency,A the drive amplitude cor-
responding to the Rabi frequency in the weak driving
limit A/ω0 ≪ 1, ΩR≈ A, and φ an adjustable phase
giving control over the rotation axis in thexy-plane of
This work Ref. 94
a 0 0 .7 0 0 .7
Xπ/2⊗ I 1 .7× 10−3 5.8× 10−5 1.9× 10−3 5.7× 10−5
Yπ/2⊗ I 1 .6× 10−3 5.7× 10−5 1.7× 10−3 5.6× 10−5
CNOT 1.5× 10−3 6.4× 10−5 1.6× 10−3 6.3× 10−5
Table II. Fast charge noise inﬁdelity contributions to the to-
tal average gate ﬁdelity of the two-qubit gate set from Ref. 94
without capacitive coupling for GaAsS-T0 qubits compared
to the original results. The ﬁdelities are consistent with re-
sults from the reference within the uncertainty bounds of3 %
of the Monte Carlo calculation. The inﬁdelities presented here
are all average gate inﬁdelities (cf. Eq. (43), Refs. 71 and 72).
the Bloch sphere. This Hamiltonian and associated deco-
herence mechanisms are well-studied in the weak driving
regime, where the rotating wave approximation (RWA)
can be applied to remove fast-oscillating terms in the
rotating frame [96, 97]. There is a comprehensive un-
derstanding of how spectral densities transform to this
frame and which frequencies are most relevant to loss of
coherence [98].
By contrast, the description of a system in the strong
driving regime, where A/ω0 ∼ 1, is more complicated
since the RWA cannot be applied without making large
errors. Yet, an improved understanding is desirable be-
cause strong driving allows for much shorter gate times
and thus shifts the window of relevant noise frequencies
towards higher energies where the total noise power is
typically lower, e.g. for 1/f noise. Conversely, faster
control also requires more accurate timing to prevent ro-
tation errors. It is therefore of interest to have available
tools that can provide a comprehensive picture for Rabi
pulses over a wide range of driving amplitudes. By mak-
ing use of the concatenation property of the ﬁlter func-
tions, our formalism can do just that.
The problem that arises when trying to numerically
investigate Rabi pulses in the weak driving regime in the
lab frame is that typical control operations have a dura-
tion τ≫ T with T = 2π/ω0. Since the sampling time
step ∆t should additionally be chosen much smaller than
a single drive period in order to sample the time evo-
lution accurately (∆t≪ T), brute-force simulations are
costly.
For T /∆t = 100 samples per period and assuming
Rabi and drive frequencies in typical regimes for SiGe
and MOS quantum dots [99, 100] or trapped ions [26],
ΩR = 1 µs−1 and ω0 = 20 ns−1, a Monte Carlo simu-
lation of a π-rotation with approximately 3 % relative
error would require109 samples in total. Using the ﬁlter
function formalism, we can drastically reduce the simu-
lation time even beyond the improvement gained from
concatenating precomputed ﬁlter functions of individual
drive periods using Eq. (29). This can be achieved with
Eq. (52), which simpliﬁes the calculation of the control
matrix for periodic Hamiltonians.
To benchmark our implementation, we use the param-

19
0 10 20 30 40 50
t (ns)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
J(ϵij ) (ns−1)
(a)
10−1 100 101 102
ω (ns−1)
10−9
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
101
103
Fϵij (ω)
(b) ϵ12
ϵ23
ϵ34
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
0
20
40
60
II
IX
IY
IZ
XI
XX
XY
XZ
YI
YX
YY
YZ
ZI
ZX
ZY
ZZ
II
IX
IY
IZ
XI
XX
XY
XZ
YI
YX
YY
YZ
ZI
ZX
ZY
ZZ
(c) ϵ12
II
IX
IY
IZ
XI
XX
XY
XZ
YI
YX
YY
YZ
ZI
ZX
ZY
ZZ
II
IX
IY
IZ
XI
XX
XY
XZ
YI
YX
YY
YZ
ZI
ZX
ZY
ZZ
(d) ϵ23
II
XI
YI
ZI
IX
XX
YX
ZX
IY
XY
YY
ZY
IZ
XZ
YZ
ZZ
II
XI
YI
ZI
IX
XX
YX
ZX
IY
XY
YY
ZY
IZ
XZ
YZ
ZZ
(e) ϵ34
−4
−2
0
2
4
Cumulant function Kϵij (τ)
×10−5
Figure 3. (a) Exchange interactionJ(ϵij) for the CNOT gate presented in Ref. 94 as function of time. (b) Filter functionsFϵij
for noise in the detunings evaluated on the computational subspace. The ﬁlter functions are modulated by oscillations at high
frequencies due to numerical artifacts of the ﬁnite step size for the time evolution. The inset shows the ﬁlter functions in the
DC regime on a linear scale with distinct peaks aroundω = 2π/τ andω = 50/τ (τ = 50 ns). (c)–(e) Computational subspace
block of the ﬁrst order approximation of the error transfer matrix, given by the cumulant functionKαα excluding second order
contributions, for the CNOT gate and the three detuningsα∈{ϵ12,ϵ 23,ϵ 34}. Note that in panel (e) the order of the rows and
columns was permuted for better comparability.
eters from above and calculate the control matrix of a
NOT gate generated by a Rabi Hamiltonian with three
diﬀerent methods on an Intel® Core™ i9-9900K eight-
core processor. First, we use Eq. (29) in a brute force
approach. Second, we utilize the concatenation property
following Eq. (35). Third, we employ the simpliﬁed ex-
pression given by Eq. (52). The brute force approach
takes 250 s of wall time whereas calculating the ﬁlter
function using the standard concatenation is faster by
two orders of magnitude, taking1.5 sto run. Lastly, the
calculation utilizing the optimized method is faster again
by two orders of magnitude and is completed in0.056 s.
As an example application, we calculate the ﬁlter func-
tions for continuous Rabi driving in the weak and strong
driving regimes. For weak driving, we use the parame-
ters from the benchmark above for a pulse of duration
τweak≈ 20 µs that corresponds to 20 identity rotations
in total. For the strong driving regime, we use the ap-
proximate analytical solution for a ﬂux qubit biased at
its symmetry point from Ref. 101 with A = ω0/4 to
drive the qubit forτstrong≈ 4 ns so that we achieve the
same amount of identity rotations as in the weak driv-
ing case. In the reference, strong driving in this regime is
showntogiverisetonon-negligiblecounterrotatingterms
that modulate the Rabi oscillations and which are well-
described by Floquet theory applied to the Rabi driving
Hamiltonian. While for the regime studied here only two
additionalmodesappear, theresultsextendtotheregime
where A > ω0 and up to eight diﬀerent frequency com-
ponents were observed.
Figure 4 shows the ﬁlter functionsFxx and Fzz for
the σx and σz noise operators in the weak (a) and the
strong (b) driving regime. Both display sharp peaks at
their Rabi frequencies and the resonance frequency for
Fzz and Fxx, respectively. We expect these features as
they correspond to perturbations of the qubit Hamilto-
nian that are resonant with the qubit dynamics about
an axis orthogonal to them. For weak driving, Fxx is
constant up to the resonance frequency where it peaks
sharply and then aligns withFzz. The latter has a peak
at the Rabi frequency before rolling oﬀ withω−2 and a
DC level that is almost ten orders of magnitude larger
than that of the transverse ﬁlter function. This behav-
ior is consistent with the results by Yanet al.[98], who
show that the noise sources dominating decoherence dur-
ing driven evolution areSxx(ω0) andSzz(ΩR). Note that
the piecewise constant control approximation causes the
weak driving ﬁlter functions to level oﬀ towards low fre-

20
10−7 10−5 10−3 10−1 101 103
10−6
10−2
102
106
F (ω)
(a)
10−2 10−1 100 101 102 103 104
ω (ns−1)
10−9
10−6
10−3
100
F (ω)
(b)
Fxx
Fzz
Ω R
ω0
Figure 4. Filter functions for weak (a) and strong (b) Rabi
driving (20 identity gates in total). Grey dashed (dotted)
lines indicate the respective drive (Rabi) frequenciesω0 (ΩR).
(a) Weak driving withA/ω0≪ 1. The ﬁlter functionFxx for
noise operator σx is approximately constant up to the reso-
nance frequency where it peaks sharply and then aligns with
the ﬁlter functionFzz forσz. Fzz peaks at the Rabi frequency
before rolling oﬀ withω−2 and a DC level that is almost ten
orders of magnitude larger than the DC level of the transverse
ﬁlter functionFxx. (b) Strong driving withA/ω0∼ 1. Again
Fzz peaks at ΩR whereas Fxx has three distinct peaks atω0
and ω0± ΩR. These features also appear at slightly higher
frequencies inFzz due to the strong coupling.
quencies after an initial roll-oﬀ (here atω ∼ 1 ms−1).
By decreasing the discretization time step∆t, one can
shift the frequency at which this eﬀect occurs to lower
frequencies and thus attribute the feature to a numerical
artefact of the approximation. However, the decoupling
properties depend quite sensitively on the pulse duration.
In case of strong driving, the two ﬁlter functions are
closer in amplitude for lower frequencies. In addition,
Fxx also peaks atω = ω0± ΩR. These peaks also show
up at higher frequencies in the dephasing ﬁlter function
Fzz, reﬂecting frequency mixing in the strong coupling
regime. While both ﬁlter functions show characteristics
of a DCG in the weak driving regime, that is they drop
to zero asω→ 0, this is not the case in the strong driving
regime. Instead, there they approach a constant level for
small frequencies. On top of rotation errors from timing
inaccuracies, we may thus expect naive strong driving
gates to be more susceptible to quasistatic noise than
weak driving gates. By shaping the pulse envelope of the
strong driving gate the decoupling properties could be
recovered.
C. Randomized Benchmarking
Standard Randomized Benchmarking (SRB) and re-
lated methods, for example interleaved RB, are popu-
lar tools to assess the quality of a qubit system and the
operations used to control it [50, 102, 103]. The basic
protocol consists of constructingK random sequences of
varying lengthm of gates drawn from the Cliﬀord group
[104], and appending a ﬁnal inversion gate so that the
identity operation should be performed in total. Each
of these pulse sequences is applied to an initial state|ψ⟩
in order to measure the survival probabilityp(|ψ⟩) af-
ter the sequence. In reality, the applied operations are
subject to noise and experimental imprecisions. This ren-
ders them imperfect and results in a survival probability
smaller than one. Assuming gate-independent errors, the
average gate ﬁdelityFavg is then obtained by ﬁtting the
measured survival probabilities for each sequence length
to the zeroth-order exponential model [103]
p(|ψ⟩) =A
(
1− dr
d− 1
)m
+B, (57)
where r = 1−F avg is the average error per single gate
to be extracted from the ﬁt,A and B are parameters
capturing state preparation and measurement (SPAM)
errors, andd is the dimensionality of the system.
One of the main assumptions of the SRB protocol
is that temporal correlations of the noise are small on
timescales longer than the average gate time [103]. If
this requirement is not satisﬁed, e.g. if1/f noise plays a
dominant role, the decay of the sequence ﬁdelity can have
non-exponential components [105–107] and a single expo-
nential ﬁt will not produce the true average gate ﬁdelity
[108, 109]. The ﬁlter function formalism suggests itself
to numerically probe RB experiments in such systems
for two reasons. First, it enables the study of gate per-
formance subject to noise with correlation times longer
than individual gate times. This regime, where a simple
description in terms of individual, isolated quantum op-
erations fails, is accessible in the ﬁlter function formalism
because universal classical noise can be included by the
power spectral densityS(ω). Second, the simulation of a
RB experiment can be performed eﬃciently by using the
concatenation property. Because RB sequences are com-
piled from a limited set of gates whose ﬁlter functions
may be precomputed, one only needs to concatenatem
ﬁlter functions for a single sequence of lengthm to gain
access to the survival probability.
Since for suﬃciently long RB sequencesr∈O (1), and
we would need to include the frequency shifts∆ in a full
simulation following Eq. (9) because the low-noise ap-
proximation Eq. (42) does not hold in this regime. Un-
fortunately, the concatenation property does not hold for
∆. Therefore, we focus on the high-ﬁdelity regime where
the exponential decay of the sequence ﬁdelity may be ap-
proximated to linear order and only the decay amplitudes
Γ need to be considered.

21
In order to evaluate the survival probability of a RB
experiment using ﬁlter functions, we employ the state
ﬁdelity from Section IID2 and focus on the single-qubit
case with d = 2 and the (normalized) Pauli basis from
Eq. (53). Because the ideal action of a RB sequence is
the identity we haveQ = 1. Assuming we prepare and
measure in the computational basis,|ψ⟩∈{| 0⟩,|1⟩} so
that
√
2|ρ⟩⟩=|σ0⟩⟩±| σ3⟩⟩, we simplify Eq. (49) to
F(|ψ⟩,URB(|ψ⟩⟨ψ|)) = 1
2
( ˜U00 + ˜U33± ˜U03± ˜U30
)
= 1 + ˜U33
2 ≈ 1− 1
2
∑
k⁄=3
Γkk.
(58)
Forthesecondequalityweusedthat ˜U istrace-preserving
and unital (c.f. Section IIA2) while in the last step we
approximated the expression using Eqs. (22) and (42).
For our simulation, we neglect SPAM errors so thatA =
B = 0.5, choose|ψ⟩ =|0⟩, and approximate Eq. (57) as
p(|0⟩) =F(|0⟩,URB(|0⟩⟨0|))≈ 1−rm (59)
for small gate errorsr≪ 1 since this is the regime which
we can eﬃciently simulate using the concatenation prop-
erty.
We simulate single-qubit SRB experiments using three
diﬀerent gate sets to generate the 24 elements of the Clif-
ford group. For the ﬁrst gate set we implement the group
by naive “single” rotations about the symmetry axes of
the cube. Each pulse corresponds to a single time seg-
ment during which one rotation is performed so that the
j-th element is given byQj = exp(−iφj⃗ nj·⃗ σ). We com-
pile the other two gate sets from primitiveπ/2 x- and
y-rotations so that on average each Cliﬀord gate consists
of 3.75 primitive gates (see Ref. 110). For the speciﬁc
implementation of the primitiveπ/2-gates we compare
“naive” rotations, i.e. with a single time segment so that
Qj = exp(−iπσj/4) for j∈{ x,y}, and the “optimized”
gates from Ref. 94. Pulse durations are chosen such that
the average duration of all 24 Cliﬀord gates generated
from a single gate set is equal for all three gate sets. This
istoensurethatthediﬀerentimplementationsoftheClif-
ford gates are sensitive to the same noise frequencies.
We investigate white noise and correlated noise with
S(ω)∝ω−0.7 assuming the same noise spectrum on each
Cartesian axis of the Bloch sphere and normalize the
noise power for each gate set and noise type (white and
correlated) so that the average Cliﬀord inﬁdelityr is the
same throughout. We then randomly draw K = 100
sequences for 11 diﬀerent lengthsm∈ [1, 101] and con-
catenate them Cliﬀord gates using Eq. (29) to compute
the control matrix of the entire sequence. For the in-
tegral in Eq. (24) we choose the ultraviolet cutoﬀ fre-
quency two orders of magnitude above the inverse dura-
tion of the shortest pulse,fUV = 10 2/
τmin. Similarly,
the infrared cutoﬀ is chosen asfIR = 10−2/
mmaxτmax
with mmax = 101 and τmax = 7τmin (since the longest
gate is compiled from seven primitive gates with dura-
tion τmin) to guarantee that all nontrivial structure of
the ﬁlter functions is resolved at small frequencies [111].
Finally, we ﬁt Eq. (59) to the inﬁdelities computed for
the diﬀerent noise spectra.
The results of the simulation are shown in Fig. 5 (a)
and (b) for white and correlated noise, respectively. For
white noise, the survival probability agrees well with the
SRB prediction for all gate types whereas for 1/f-like
noise the “single” gates (green pluses) deviate consider-
ably. Hence, ﬁtting the zeroth-order SRB model to such
datawillnotrevealthetrueaveragegateﬁdelityalthough
errors are of order unity. We note that Refs. 105 and 37
found similar results using diﬀerent methods for1/f and
perfectly correlated DC noise, respectively. The former
observed SRB to estimater within 25 % and the latter
found the mean of the SRB ﬁdelity distribution to de-
viate from the mode, thereby giving rise to incorrectly
estimated ﬁdelities.
On top of aﬃrming the ﬁndings by the references, our
results demonstrate that the accuracy of the predictions
made by SRB theory, i.e. that the RB decay rate di-
rectly corresponds to the average error rate of the gates,
not only depends on the gate implementation but also
on which error channels are assumed. This can be seen
from the inset of Fig. 5(b), where only dephasing noise
(σz) contributions are shown. For this noise channel
and the “naive” gates, one ﬁnds a slower RB decay than
expected from the actual average gate ﬁdelity, so that
the latter would be overestimated by an RB experiment,
whereas the “single” gates show the opposite behavior.
Depending on the gate set and relevant error channels,
non-Markovian noise may thus even lead to improved se-
quence ﬁdelities due to errors interfering destructively.
This behavior is captured by the pulse correlation ﬁl-
ter functions whose contributions to the sequence ﬁdelity
lead to the deviations from the SRB prediction.
Notably, the data for the “optimized” gates agree with
the prediction for every noise channel individually which
implies that correlations between pulses are suppressed.
This highlights the formalism’s attractiveness for numer-
ical gate optimization as the pulse correlation ﬁlter func-
tions F (gg′)(ω) may be exploited to suppress correlation
errors. To be more explicit, the correlation decay am-
plitudes Γ(gg′) from Eq. (31) can be used to construct
cost functions for quantum optimal control algorithms
like GRAPE [112, 113] or CRAB [114]. By constructing
linear combinations ofΓ(gg′) with diﬀerent pulse indices
g and g′, correlations between any number of pulses can
be speciﬁcally targeted and suppressed using numerical
pulse optimization.
D. Quantum Fourier transform
To demonstrate the ﬂexibility of our software im-
plementation, we calculate ﬁlter functions for a four-
qubit quantum Fourier transform (QFT) [45, 115] cir-
cuit. QFT plays an important role in many quantum
algorithms such as Shor’s algorithm [116] and quantum

22
0.925
0.950
0.975
1.000
(a)
naive
optimized
single
0th order SRB theory
0 20 40 60 80 100
Sequence length m
0.925
0.950
0.975
1.000
(b)
Survival probability p(|ψ ⟩)
0 20 40 60 80 100
0.96
0.98
1.00
Figure 5. Simulation of a Standard RB (SRB) experiment
using 100 random sequences per point for diﬀerent gate and
noise types (see the main text for an explanation of the gate
type monikers). Dashed lines are ﬁts of Eq. (59) to the data
while the solid black lines correspond to a zeroth-order SRB
model with A = B = 0.5 and the true average gate inﬁ-
delity per Cliﬀordr. Errorbars show the standard deviation
of the SRB sequence ﬁdelities, illustrating that for the “sin-
gle” gate set noise correlations can lead to ampliﬁed destruc-
tive and constructive interference of errors. The same noise
spectrum is used for all three error channels (σx,σy,σz) and
the large plots show the sum of all contributions. (a) Un-
correlated white noise with the noise power adjusted for each
gate type so that the average error per gater is constant over
all gate types. No notable deviation is seen between diﬀerent
gate types. (b) Correlated 1/f-like noise with noise power
adjusted to match the average Cliﬀord ﬁdelity in (a). The
decay of the “single” gateset diﬀers considerably from that of
the other gate sets and the SRB decay expected for the given
average gate ﬁdelity, whereas “naive” and “optimized” gates
match the zeroth order SRB model well, indicating that cor-
relations in the noise aﬀect the relation between SRB decay
and average gate ﬁdelity in a gateset-dependent way. Inset:
contributions from σz-noise show that the sequence ﬁdelity
can be better than expected for certain gate types and noise
channels.
phase estimation [45]. For the underlying gate set, we
assume a standard Rabi driving model with IQ con-
trol and nearest neighbor exchange. That is, we as-
sume full control of the x- and y-axes of the individ-
ual qubits as well as the exchange interaction medi-
ating coupling between two neighboring qubits. This
system allows for native access to the minimal gateset
G = {Xi(π/2), Yi(π/2), CRij(π
/
23 )} where CRij(φ)
denotes a controlled rotation byφ about z with control
qubiti and target qubitj. Controlled-z rotations by an-
gles π/2m as required for the QFT can thus be obtained
by concatenating 23−m minimal gates CRij(π
/
23 ).
Despite native access to all necessary gates, we em-
ploy QuTiP’s implementation [42] of the GRAPE algo-
rithm [112, 113] to generate the gates in order to high-
light our method’s suitability for numerically optimized
pulses. For the optimization we choose a time step of
∆t = 1 ns and a total gate duration of τ = 30 ns .
For completeness, see Appendix C for details on the
optimized gates. We then construct the remaining re-
quired gates by sequencing these elementary gates, i.e.
the Hadamard gateHi = Xi(π/2)◦ Xi(π/2)◦ Yi(π/2),
where B◦ A denotes the composition of gates A and B
such that gate A is executed before gate B. To map the
canonical circuit [45] onto our speciﬁc qubit layout with
only nearest-neighbor coupling, we furthermore intro-
duce SWAP operations to couple distant qubits. These
gates can be implemented by three CNOTs,SWAPij =
CNOTij◦CNOTji◦CNOTij. The CNOTs in turn are ob-
tained by a Hadamard transform of the controlled phase
gate, CNOTij = Hj◦ CRij(π)◦ Hj. The complete quan-
tum circuit is shown at the top of Fig. 6; for the canonical
circuit with all-to-all connectivity refer to Ref. 45. In to-
tal, there are 442 elementary pulses, 198 of which are
required for the three SWAPs on the ﬁrst two qubits,
so that the entire algorithm would take∼ 13 µs to run.
Note that the circuit could be compressed in time by
parallelizing some operations but for simplicity we only
execute gates sequentially and do not execute dedicated
idling gates.
In order to leverage the extensibility of the ﬁlter func-
tion approach (see Section IIIB), we use a Pauli basis for
the pulses and proceed as follows:
1. Instantiate thePulseSequence objects for the ele-
mentary gates G for the ﬁrst two qubits and cache
the control matrices.
2. Compileallrequiredsingle-andtwo-qubitpulsesby
concatenating thePulseSequences that implement
G.
3. Extend the PulseSequences to the full four-qubit
Hilbert space.
4. Recursively concatenate recurring gate sequences
by concatenating four-qubit PulseSequences, e.g.
SWAP10◦ CR10(π
/
21 )◦ H0, in order to optimally
use the performance beneﬁt oﬀered by Eq. (29)
5. Concatenate the last PulseSequences to get the
complete QFT pulse.
For our gate parameters and400 frequency points, this
procedure takes around5 son an Intel® Core™ i9-9900K
eight-core processor, whereas computing the ﬁlter func-
tions naively using Eq. (35) takes around 4 min. The
resulting ﬁlter functions are shown in Fig. 6 for the noise
operators aﬀecting the ﬁrst qubit; for an in-depth dis-
cussion and validation of the ﬁdelities predicted, see the
accompanying letter Ref. 16 and its supplementary infor-
mation. Evidently, the ﬁdelity of the algorithm is most

23
3 • × // 0
2 • × R(π
/
23 ) × • × // 1
1 • × R(π
/
22 ) × • × R(π
/
22 ) × • × // 2
0 H R(π
/
21 ) × H R(π
/
21 ) × H R(π
/
21 ) × H // 3
10−4 10−3 10−2 10−1 100 101 102
ω (ns−1)
10−2
100
102
104
106
108
Fα(ω)
σ(0)
x
σ(0)
y
σ(0)
z σ(1)
z
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Iα(0, ω)/Iα(0, ∞ )
Figure 6. Top: Circuit for a QFT on four qubits with nearest-neighbor coupling. Labels next to the wires indicate the qubit
index, showing that the ﬁnal SWAP operation has already been carried out. Bottom: Filter functions for noise operators on
the ﬁrst qubit (i = 0). Dotted grey lines indicate the positions of then-th harmonic,ωn = 2πn/τ withτ = 30 nsthe duration
of the gates inG, forn∈{ 1, 2, 3, 4}. The ﬁlter functions have a baseline of around104 in the rangeω∈ [10−1, 101] ns−1 before
they drop down to follow the usual1/ω2 behavior. The dashed lines show the error sensitivitiesIα(ω1,ω 2) :=
∫ω2
ω1
dωFα(ω) in
the frequency band[0,ω ] as a fraction of the total sensitivityIα(0,∞). These are closely related to the entanglement ﬁdelity
(c.f. Eqs. (26) and (48)) and suggest that high frequencies up to the knee atω≈ 10 ns−1 cannot be neglected if the cutoﬀ
frequency of the noise is suﬃciently high or the spectrum does not drop oﬀ quickly enough (note the linear scale as opposed to
the logarithmic scale for the ﬁlter functions).
susceptible to DC noise; below roughlyω ⪅ 10−3 ns−1
the ﬁlter functions level oﬀ at their maximum value. In
the GHz range there is a plateau with sharp peaks cor-
responding to the n-th harmonics of the inverse pulse
duration ωn = 2 πn/τ, where the leftmost belongs to
n = 1 . The dashed lines show the error sensitivities
Iα(ω1,ω 2) :=
∫ω2
ω1
dωF (ω) in the frequency band [0,ω ]
relative to the total sensitivityIα(0,∞). For a white
spectrum, i.e.S(ω) = const., this quantiﬁes the fraction
of the total entanglement inﬁdelity that is accumulated
up to frequency ω (c.f. Eqs. (26) and (48)). Thus, to
obtain a precise estimate of the algorithm’s ﬁdelity, ﬁve
frequency decades need to be taken into account.
Theseinsightsdemonstratethatourmethodrepresents
a useful tool to analyze how and to which degree small
algorithms are aﬀected by correlated errors, and how this
eﬀect depends on the gate implementation. It could thus
also be used to choose or optimize gates in an algorithm-
speciﬁc way.
VI. FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS
Before we conclude, let us address two possible avenues
for future work, one for the formalism itself and one for
its application.
To extend our approach to the ﬁlter function for-
malism beyond the scope discussed in this work, the
most evident path forward is to allow for quantum me-
chanical baths instead of purely classical ones. Such
an extension would facilitate studying for example non-
unital T1-like processes. In fact, the ﬁlter function for-
malism was originally introduced considering quantum
baths such as spin-boson models [18, 19] or more gen-
eral baths [17, 23, 117], but it remains an open question
whether this can be applied to our presentation of the
formalism and the numerical implementation in partic-
ular. In a fully quantum-mechanical treatment, (suﬃ-
ciently weak) noise coupling into the quantum system
can be modelled via a set of bath operators{Dα(t)}α
so that Hn(t) = ∑
αBα(t)⊗Dα(t) (the classical case
is recovered by replacing Dα(t) → bα(t)1) [118]. Ac-
cordingly, the ensemble average over the stochastic bath
variables{bα(t)}α needs to be replaced by the quantum
expectation valuetrB(·ρB) with respect to the stateρB

24
of the bath B. One therefore needs to deal with cor-
relation functions of bath operators instead of stochas-
tic variables. An immediate consequence for numerical
applications is hence an increased dimensionality of the
system, which could be dealt with by using analytical
expressions for the partial trace over the bath.
For future applications of our method, it would be in-
terestingtostudytheeﬀectsofnoisecorrelationsinquan-
tum error correction (QEC) schemes [119–121]. While
extensive research has been performed on QEC, noise is
usually assumed to be uncorrelated between error correc-
tion cycles. In this respect, our formalism may shed light
on eﬀects that need to be taken into account for a real-
istic description of the protocol. As outlined above, we
can compute expectation values of (stabilizer) measure-
ments in a straightforward manner from the error trans-
fer matrix. Unfortunately, this implies performing the
ensemble average over diﬀerent noise realizations, there-
fore removing all correlations between subsequent mea-
surement outcomes for a given noise realization. Hence,
the same feature that allows us to calculate the quantum
process for correlated noise, namely that we compute
only the ﬁnal map by averaging over all “paths” lead-
ing to it, prevents us from studying correlations between
consecutive cycles. To overcome this limitation in the
context of quantum memory one could invoke the princi-
ple of deferred measurement [45] and move all measure-
ments to the end of the circuit, replacing classically con-
trolled operations dependent on the measurement out-
comes by conditional quantum operations. Alternatively,
to incorporate the probabilistic nature of measurements,
one could devise a branching model that implements
the classically controlled recovery operation by follow-
ing both conditional branches of measurement outcomes
with weights corresponding to the measurement proba-
bilities as computed from the ensemble-averaged error
transfer matrix. An intriguing connection also exists to
the quantum Zeno eﬀect, for which quantum systems
subject to periodic projective measurements have been
identiﬁed with a ﬁlter function [17, 122, 123].
VII. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
As quantum control schemes become more sophisti-
catedandtakeintoaccountrealistichardwareconstraints
andsequencingeﬀects, theiranalyticdescriptionbecomes
cumbersome, making numerical tools invaluable for ana-
lyzing pulse performance. In the above, we have shown
that the ﬁlter function formalism lends itself naturally
to these tasks since the central objects of our formula-
tion, the interaction picture noise operators, obey a sim-
ple composition rule which can be utilized to eﬃciently
calculate them for a sequence of quantum gates. Because
thenatureofthenoiseisencodedinapowerspectralden-
sity in the frequency domain, its eﬀects are isolated from
the description of the control until they are evaluated by
the overlap integral of noise spectrum and ﬁlter function.
Hence, the noise operators are highly reusable in calcu-
lations and can serve as an economic way of simulating
pulse sequences.
Building on the results of a separate publication [16],
we have presented a general framework to study deco-
herence mechanisms and pulse correlations in quantum
systems coupled to generic classical noise environments.
By combining the quantum operations and ﬁlter function
formalisms, we have shown how to compute the Liouville
representation of the exact error channel of an arbitrary
control operation in the presence of Gaussian noise. For
non-Gaussian noise our results become perturbative in
the noise strength. Furthermore, we have introduced the
filter_functions Python software package that imple-
ments the aforementioned method. We showed both an-
alytically and numerically that our software implementa-
tion can outperform Monte Carlo techniques by orders of
magnitude. By employing the formalism and software to
study several examples we demonstrated the wide range
of possible applications.
The capacity for applications in quantum optimal con-
trol has already been established above. In a forthcom-
ing publication, we will present analytical derivatives for
the ﬁdelity ﬁlter function, Eq. (26), and their implemen-
tation in the software package [90]. Together with the
inﬁdelity, Eq. (48), they can serve as eﬃcient cost func-
tions for pulse optimization in the presence of realistic,
correlated noise [43, 87]. Since our method oﬀers insight
into correlations between pulses at diﬀerent positions in
a sequence, the pulse correlation ﬁlter functionF (gg′)(ω)
with g⁄= g′ can additionally serve as a tool for study-
ing under which conditions pulses decouple from noise
with long correlation times. Such insight would be valu-
able to design pulses for algorithms. Another interest-
ing application could be quantum error correction in the
regime of long-time correlated noise as outlined above in
Section VI, where we also brieﬂy touched upon a possi-
ble extension of the framework to quantum mechanical
baths.
The tools presented here, both analytical and numer-
ical as implemented in thefilter_functions software
package [41], provide an accessible way for computing ﬁl-
ter functions in generic control settings across the diﬀer-
entmaterialplatformsemployedinquantumtechnologies
and beyond.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the European Research
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation program (Grant Agreement
No. 679342).

25
Appendix A: Additional derivations
In this appendix we show additional derivations omitted from the main text.
1. Derivation of the single-qubit cumulant function in the Liouville representation
For a single qubit, the Pauli basis{σi}3
i=0 ={1,σx,σy,σz}
/√
2 is a natural choice to deﬁne the Liouville represen-
tation. In this case, the trace tensor Eq. (18) can be simpliﬁed and thus Eq. (17) given a more intuitive form which we
derive in this appendix. Since the cumulant function is linear in the noise indicesα,β we drop them in the following
for legibility. Our results hold for both a single pair of noise indices and the total cumulant. We start by observing
the relation
Tklij = tr(σkσlσiσj) = (δklδij−δkiδlj +δkjδji)/2 (A1)
for the Pauli basis elementsσk,k ∈{ 1, 2, 3}. Including the identity elementσ0 in the trace tensor gives additional
terms. However, as we show now none of these contribute toK because they cancel out.
First, since the noise HamiltonianHn(t) is traceless and therefore˜Bα0(t) = 0, we haveΓkl, ∆kl∝ (1−δk0)(1−δ0l),
i.e. the ﬁrst column and row of both the decay amplitude and frequency shift matrices are zero, and hence terms in
the sum of Eq. (17) with eitherk = 0 orl = 0 vanish. Next, fori =j = 0 all of the traces cancel out as can be easily
seen. The last possible cases are given byi = 0,j ⁄= 0 and vice versa. For these cases we have
Tkl0j =Tklj0 = 1√
2 tr(σkσlσj) = i
2εklj (A2)
with εkli the completely antisymmetric tensor. Both of the above cases vanish inK since, taking the casej = 0 for
example,
1
2 (Tkl0i−Tk0li−Tkil0 +Tki0l) = i
2 (εklj−εlkj−εklj +εlkj) = 0 (A3a)
for the decay amplitudesΓ and
1
2 (Tkl0i−Tlk0i−Tkli0 +Tlki0) = i
2 (εkli−εlki−εkli +εlki) = 0 (A3b)
for the frequency shifts∆. Hence, only terms withi,j > 0 contribute and we can plug the simpliﬁed expressions for
the trace tensorTklij, Eq. (A1), into Eq. (17) to write the cumulant function for a single qubit and the Pauli basis
concisely as
Kij(τ) =−1
2
∑
kl
(
∆kl (Tklji−Tlkji−Tklij +Tlkij) + Γkl (Tklji−Tkjli−Tkilj +Tkijl)
)
(A4)
=−
∑
kl
(
∆kl(δkiδlj−δkjδli) + Γkl(δklδij−δkjδli)
)
(A5)
= ∆ji− ∆ij + Γij−δij tr Γ (A6)
=
{
−∑
k⁄=i Γkk if i =j,
−∆ij + ∆ji + Γij if i⁄=j, (A7)
as given in the main text.
2. Evaluation of the integrals in Eq. (39)
Here we calculate the integrals appearing in the calculation of the frequency shifts∆, Eq. (40), given by
I(g)
ijmn(ω) =
∫ tg
tg−1
dt eiΩ(g)
ij (t−tg−1)−iωt
∫ t
tg−1
dt′ eiΩ(g)
mn(t′−tg−1)+iωt′
. (A8)

26
The inner integration is simple to perform and we get
I(g)
ijmn(ω) =
∫ tg
tg−1
dt eiΩ(g)
ij (t−tg−1)−iω(t−tg−1)×



ei(ω+Ω(g)
mn)(t−tg−1)−1
i(ω+Ω(g)
mn) if ω + Ω(g)
mn⁄= 0
t−tg−1 if ω + Ω(g)
mn = 0.
(A9)
Shifting the limits of integration and performing integration by parts in the caseω + Ω(g)
mn = 0 then yields
I(g)
ijmn(ω) =



1
ω+Ω(g)
mn
(
e
i(Ω(g)
ij −ω)∆tg−1
Ω(g)
ij −ω − e
i(Ω(g)
ij +Ω(g)
mn)∆tg−1
Ω(g)
ij +Ω(g)
mn
)
if ω + Ω(g)
mn⁄= 0,
1
Ω(g)
ij −ω
(
e
i(Ω(g)
ij −ω)∆tg−1
Ω(g)
ij −ω − i∆tgei(Ω(g)
ij −ω)∆tg
)
if ω + Ω(g)
mn = 0∧ Ω(g)
ij −ω⁄= 0,
∆t2
g
/
2 if ω + Ω(g)
mn = 0∧ Ω(g)
ij −ω = 0.
(A10)
3. Simplifying the calculation of the entanglement inﬁdelity
In the main text, we claimed that the contribution of noise sources(α,β ) to the total entanglement inﬁdelity
Ie( ˜U) =∑
αβIαβ reduces from the trace of the cumulant functionK to
Iαβ =− 1
d2 trKαβ (A11)
= 1
d tr Γαβ. (A12)
To show this, we substituteK by its deﬁnition in terms of∆ and Γ according to Eq. (17). This yields for the trace
trKαβ =−1
2
∑
kl
δij(fijkl∆αβ,kl +gijklΓαβ,kl)
=−1
2
∑
ikl
Γαβ,kl (Tklii +Tlkii− 2Tkili)
(A13)
since ∆ is antisymmetric. In order to further simplify the trace tensors on the right hand side of Eq. (A13), we
observe that the orthonormality and completeness of the operator basisC deﬁning the Liouville representation ofK
(c.f. Eq. (14)) is equivalent to requiring thatC†C = 1 withC reshaped into ad2×d2 matrix by a suitable mapping.
This condition may also be written as
δacδbd =
∑
k
C∗
k,abCk,cd
=
∑
k
Ck,baCk,cd
(A14)
because every elementCk is Hermitian. Using this relation in Eq. (A13) then yields
trKαβ =−1
2
∑
kl
Γαβ,kl (2dδkl− 2 tr(Ck) tr(Cl))
=−d tr Γαβ.
(A15)
The last equality only holds true for bases with a single non-traceless element (the identity), such as the bases discussed
in Section IIIC. This is because in this case,tr(Ck) = 0 for k >0 whereas Γαβ,kl = 0 for eitherk = 0 or l = 0 since
Γ is a function of the traceless noise Hamiltonian for whichtr(C0Hn)∝ trHn = 0 (i.e. the ﬁrst column of the control
matrix is zero, see Eqs. (16) and (21)). Finally, substituting Eq. (A15) into Eq. (A11) we obtain our result
Iαβ = 1
d tr Γαβ. (A16)

27
Appendix B: Singlet-Triplet Gate Fidelity
In this appendix we lay out in more detail how the ﬁdelity of the optimizedS-T0 qubit gates from Ref. 94 was
calculatedusingﬁlterfunctions. Intwosinglet-tripletqubits, angularmomentumconservationsuppressesoccupancyof
stateswithnon-vanishingmagneticspinquantumnumber ms sothatthetotalaccessiblestatespaceofdimension d = 6
is spanned by{|↑↓↑↓⟩,|↑↓↓↑⟩,|↓↑↑↓⟩,|↓↑↓↑⟩,|↑↑↓↓⟩,|↓↓↑↑⟩}. A straightforward method to single out the computational
subspace (CS) dynamics from those on the whole space would be to simply project the error transfer matrix˜U≈ 1+K
withK the cumulant function onto the CS as proposed by Wood and Gambetta [76], that is calculate the ﬁdelity as
Fe = tr
(
Πc ˜U
)
/d2
c where Πc is the Liouville representation of the projector onto the CS anddc = 4 the dimension of
the CS. However, here we use a more involved procedure in order to gain more insight from the error transfer matrix
as well as to obtain a better comparison to the ﬁdelities computed by Cerfontaineet al.[94], who map the ﬁnal6× 6
propagator to the closest unitary on the4× 4 CS during their Monte Carlo simulation.
To calculate the ﬁdelity of the target unitary on the4× 4 CS, we thus construct an orthonormal operator basis
C of the full6× 6 space that is partitioned into elements which are nontrivial only on the CS on the one hand and
elements which are nontrivial only on the remaining space on the other such thatC =Cc∪C𝓁. Using such a basis, we
can then trace only over CS elements of the error transfer matrix˜U in Eq. (45) to obtain the ﬁdelity of the gate on
the CS. Moreover, we retain the opportunity to characterize the gates on the basis of the Pauli matrices.
Since there is no obvious way to extend the Pauli basis for two qubits to the complete space we proceed as follows:
For the CS, we pad the two-qubit Pauli basis with zeros on the leakage levels, i.e.
Cc
i
.=


|↑↑↓↓⟩ |↓↓↑↑⟩
Pi 0 0
⟨↑↑↓↓| 0 0 0
⟨↓↓↑↑| 0 0 0

, i ∈{ 0,..., 15}, (B1)
where thePi are normalized two-qubit Pauli matrices (c.f. Eq. (53)) in the basis{|↑↓↑↓⟩,|↑↓↓↑⟩,|↓↑↑↓⟩,|↓↑↓↑⟩}. To
complete the basis we require an additional 20 elements orthogonal to the 16 padded Pauli matrices. We obtain the
remaining elements by ﬁrst expanding theCc
i in an arbitrary basis{Λi}35
i=0 of the complete space (we choose a GGM,
c.f. Eq. (54), for simplicity), yielding a16× 36 matrix of expansion coeﬃcients:
Mij = tr(Cc
i Λj). (B2)
We then compute an orthonormal vector basisV (a matrix of size36× 20) for the null space ofM using singular
value decompositionM =UΣV† and acquire the corresponding basis matrices as
C𝓁
i =
∑
j
ΛjVji, i ∈{ 0,..., 19}. (B3)
Finally, to account for the fact that Ref. 94 map the total propagator to the closest unitary on the CS, we exclude the
identity Pauli elementCc
0∝ diag(1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0) from the trace over the computational subspace part of˜U represented
in the basisC =Cc∪C 𝓁 when calculating the ﬁdelity,
Fe = 1
16
15∑
i=1
˜Uii, (B4)
since for unitary operations on the CS we haveK00≈ 1− ˜U00 = 1− tr
(
Cc
0 ˜UCc
0 ˜U†)
= 0. Hence, excluding ˜U00 from
the trace corresponds to partially disregarding non-unitary components of the error channel on the computational
subspace. Although not the only element that diﬀers compared to the closest subspace unitary,K00 contains the most
obvious contribution, whereas those of other elements are more diﬃcult to disentangle into unitary and non-unitary
components.
Similar to the ﬁdelity, we also obtain the canonical ﬁlter function shown in panel (b) of Fig. 3 by summing only
over columns one through 15 of the control matrix,Fϵij(ω) = ∑15
k=1
⏐⏐ ˜Bϵijk(ω)
⏐⏐2
. In fact, including the ﬁrst column,
corresponding to the padded identity matrixCc
0, in the ﬁlter function removes the DCG character ofFϵ12(ω) and
Fϵ34(ω), which instead approach a constant level of around 20 (note that the ﬁlter function is dimensionless in our
units) at zero frequency. This is consistent with the fact that the gates were optimized using quasistatic and fast
white noise contributions to the ﬁdelity after mapping to the closest unitary on the computational subspace. We have
performed Monte Carlo resimulations that support this reading. In Fig. 7 we show the ﬁlter functions once including
and once excluding the contributions fromCc
0.

28
10−1 100
ω (ns−1)
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
Fϵij (ω)
(a)
10−1 100
ω (ns−1)
(b)
ϵ12
ϵ23
ϵ34
Figure 7. Filter functions of the voltage detuningsϵij excluding (a) and including (b) the zero-padded identity matrix basis
elementCc
0∝ diag(1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0) for the computational subspace. Evidently, includingCc
0 removes the DCG character, namely
thatFϵij (ω)→ 0asω→ 0, of the gates but has little eﬀect on the high-frequency behavior. As the pulse optimization minimizes,
among other ﬁgures of merit, the inﬁdelity of the ﬁnal propagator mapped to the closest unitary on the computational subspace
due to quasistatic and fast white noise, this indicates that excludingCc
0 from the ﬁlter function corresponds to partially
neglecting non-unitary components of the propagator on the computational subspace.
Appendix C: GRAPE-optimized gate set for QFT
For completeness, in this appendix we give details on the GRAPE-optimized pulses for the gate set G =
{Xi(π/2), Yi(π/2), CRij(π
/
23 )} used in Section VD to simulate a QFT algorithm. As mentioned in the main
text, we consider a toy Rabi driving model with IQ single-qubit control and exchange to mediate inter-qubit coupling.
Cast in the language of quantum optimal control theory this translates to a vanishing drift (static) Hamiltonian,
Hd = 0, and a control Hamiltonian in the rotating frame given by
Hc(t) =H(0)
c (t)⊗ 1 + 1⊗H(1)
c (t) +H(01)
c (t), (C1)
H(i)
c (t) =Ii(t)σ(i)
x +Qi(t)σ(i)
y , H (ij)
c (t) =Jij(t)σ(i)
z ⊗σ(j)
z , (C2)
where Ii(t) and Qi(t) are the in-phase and quadrature pulse envelopes andσ(i)
x,y are the Pauli matrices acting on
the i-th and extended trivially to the other qubit. As our goal is only of illustrative nature and not to provide
a detailed gate optimization, we obtain the controls{I0(t),Q 0(t),I 1(t),Q 1(t),J 12(t)} for the gate set G using the
GRAPE algorithm implemented inQuTiP [42] initialized with randomly distributed amplitudes. The resulting pulses
and the corresponding ﬁlter functions for the relevant noise operators are shown in Fig. 8.
Appendix D: Convergence Bounds
In this appendix we give bounds for the convergence of the expansions employed in the main text for the case
of purely auto-correlated noise, Sαβ(ω) = δαβSαβ(ω) = Sα(ω), following the approach by Greenet al. [29]. For
Gaussian noise, our expansion is exact when including ﬁrst and second order Magnus expansion (ME) terms. Hence,
the convergence radius of the ME becomes inﬁnite and the ﬁdelity can be computed exactly by evaluating the matrix
exponential Eq. (11). For non-Gaussian noise, the following considerations apply.
1. Magnus Expansion
The ME of the error propagator Eq. (8a) converges if
∫τ
0 dt‖ ˜Hn(t)‖ < πwith‖A‖2 =⟨A,A⟩ = ∑
ij|Aij|2 the
Frobenius norm [57]. We assume a time dependence of the noise operators of the formBα(t) = sα(t)Bα. By the

29
0 10 20 30
t (ns)
0
1
2
3Control (ns−1)
(a) I0
Q0
0 10 20 30
t (ns)
(c) I0
Q0
0 10 20 30
t (ns)
(e) I0
I1
J01
Q0
Q1
10−4 10−2 100 102
ω (ns−1)
0
100
200
300
400F (ω)
(b)
σ(0)
x
σ(0)
y
10−4 10−2 100 102
ω (ns−1)
(d)
σ(0)
x
σ(0)
y
10−4 10−2 100 102
ω (ns−1)
(f)
σ(0)
x
σ(1)
x
σ(0)
y
σ(1)
y
σ(0)
z σ(1)
z
Figure 8. Control ﬁelds (top row) and corresponding ﬁlter functions (bottom row) of the GRAPE-optimized pulses inG.
(a),(b) X0(π/2); (c),(d) Y0(π/2); (e),(f) CR01(π
/
23 ). Note that the optimization is neither very sophisticated nor realistic
as the algorithm only maximizes the systematic (coherent) ﬁdelitytr
(
UQ†
targ
)
/d and the randomly distributed initial control
amplitudes are not subject to any constraints.
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality we then have
‖‖ ˜Hn(t)
‖‖2
=‖Hn(t)‖2
=
∑
αβ
sα(t)sβ(t)bα(t)bβ(t)⟨Bα,Bβ⟩
≤
∑
αβ
sα(t)sβ(t)bα(t)bβ(t)‖Bα‖‖Bβ‖
≤
[∑
α
G∑
g=1
ϑ(g)(t)s(g)
α b(m)
α ‖Bα‖
]2
(D1)
where b(m)
α is the maximum value that the noise assumes during the pulse,ϑ(g)(t) = Θ(t−tg−1)− Θ(t−tg) is one
during the g-th time interval and zero else, and where we approximated the time evolution as piecewise constant.

30
Then, in order to guarantee convergence of the ME,
∫ τ
0
dt‖ ˜Hn(t)‖≤
∫ τ
0
dt
⏐⏐⏐⏐
∑
α
G∑
g=1
ϑ(g)(t)s(g)
α b(m)
α ‖Bα‖
⏐⏐⏐⏐
=
∑
α
b(m)
α ‖Bα‖
G∑
g=1
s(g)
α
∫ tg
tg−1
dt
=
∑
α
Cmδbα‖Bα‖
G∑
g=1
s(g)
α ∆tg
=:N
(D2)
where we have expressed the in principle unknown maximum noise amplitudeb(m)
α in terms of the root mean square
value δbα. That is, b(m)
α = Cm⟨bα(0)2⟩1/2 = Cmδbα for a suﬃciently large valueCm. Finally, realizing thatδb2
α =∫ dω
2πSα(ω) and by the triangle inequality,
N =Cm
∑
α
‖Bα‖
[∫ ∞
−∞
dω
2πSα(ω)
]1/2 G∑
g=1
s(g)
α ∆tg
≤Cm
[∑
α
‖Bα‖2
∫ ∞
−∞
dω
2πSα(ω)
( G∑
g=1
s(g)
α ∆tg
)2]1/2
=:Cmξ
!
<π
(D3)
where we have introduced the parameterξ. Thus, the expansion converges ifξ < π/Cm. However, we note that
in practice the rms noise amplitudeδbα will often be inﬁnite, limiting the usefulness of this bound for certain noise
spectra.
2. Inﬁdelity
Again assuming a time dependenceBα(t) = sα(t)Bα as well as piecewise constant control, we note that for the
inﬁdelity we have (c.f. Eq. (45))
|tr(Γ)| =
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
∑
α
∫ τ
0
dt2
∫ τ
0
dt1⟨bα(t1)bα(t2)⟩
∑
k
˜Bαk(t1) ˜Bαk(t2)
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
≤
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
∑
α
∫ τ
0
dt2
∫ τ
0
dt1⟨bα(t1)bα(t2)⟩
G∑
g,g′=1
ϑ(g)(t1)ϑ(g′)(t2)s(g)
α s(g′)
α ‖Bα‖2
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
≤
∑
α
‖Bα‖2 ⟨
b2
α(0)
⟩
| {z }∫ dω
2πSα(ω)
G∑
g,g′=1
s(g)
α s(g′)
α
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
∫ tg′
tg′−1
dt2
∫ tg
tg−1
dt1⟨bα(t1)bα(t2)⟩| {z }
|·|≤ 1
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
≤
∑
α
[
‖Bα‖2
∫ ∞
−∞
dω
2πSα(ω)
( G∑
g=1
s(g)
α ∆tg
)2]
=ξ2,
(D4)
where, going from the second to the third line, we have factored out the total power of noise sourceα from the
cross-correlation function,⟨bα(t1)bα(t2)⟩ =
⟨
b2
α(0)
⟩⏐⏐⟨bα(t1)bα(t2)⟩
⏐⏐. Thus, the ﬁrst order inﬁdelity Eq. (45) is upper
bounded byξ2/
d, the same parameter also bounding the convergence of the ME, and higher orders can be neglected
if ξ2≪ 1.
Note that similar arguments can be made for the higher orders of the ME [29]. In particular, then-th order ME
term containingn-point correlation functions of the noise is of orderO(ξn) as stated in the main text.

31
[1] David P. DiVincenzo, “Two-bit gates are universal for
quantum computation,” Phys. Rev. A51, 1015–1022
(1995).
[2] Goran Lindblad, “On the generators of quantum dy-
namical semigroups,” Communications in Mathematical
Physics 48, 119–130 (1976).
[3] M. Brownnutt, M. Kumph, P. Rabl, and R. Blatt, “Ion-
trap measurements of electric-ﬁeld noise near surfaces,”
Rev. Mod. Phys.87, 1419–1482 (2015).
[4] P. Kumar, S. Sendelbach, M. A. Beck, J. W. Freeland,
Zhe Wang, Hui Wang, Clare C. Yu, R. Q. Wu, D. P.
Pappas, and R. McDermott, “Origin and Reduction of
1/f Magnetic Flux Noise in Superconducting Devices,”
Phys. Rev. Applied6, 041001(R) (2016).
[5] Jun Yoneda, Kenta Takeda, Tomohiro Otsuka, Takashi
Nakajima, Matthieu R. Delbecq, Giles Allison, Takumu
Honda, Tetsuo Kodera, Shunri Oda, Yusuke Hoshi,
Noritaka Usami, Kohei M. Itoh, and Seigo Tarucha,
“A quantum-dot spin qubit with coherence limited by
charge noise and ﬁdelity higher than 99.9%,” Nature
Nanotechnology 13, 102–106 (2018).
[6] E. Paladino, Y. M. Galperin, G. Falci, and B. L. Alt-
shuler, “1/f noise: Implications for solid-state quantum
information,” Reviews of Modern Physics86, 361–418
(2014).
[7] Hui Khoon Ng and John Preskill, “Fault-tolerant quan-
tum computation versus Gaussian noise,” Phys. Rev. A
79, 032318 (2009).
[8] M. Veldhorst, J. C. C. Hwang, C. H. Yang, A. W.
Leenstra, B. de Ronde, J. P. Dehollain, J. T. Muho-
nen, F. E. Hudson, K. M. Itoh, A. Morello, and
A. S. Dzurak, “An addressable quantum dot qubit with
fault-tolerant control-ﬁdelity,” Nature Nanotechnology
9, 981–985 (2014).
[9] S. Debnath, N. M. Linke, C. Figgatt, K. A. Landsman,
K. Wright, and C. Monroe, “Demonstration of a small
programmable quantum computer with atomic qubits,”
Nature 536, 63–66 (2016).
[10] O. E. Dial, M. D. Shulman, S. P. Harvey, H. Bluhm,
V. Umansky, and A. Yacoby, “Charge Noise Spec-
troscopy Using Coherent Exchange Oscillations in a
Singlet-Triplet Qubit,” Phys. Rev. Lett.110, 146804
(2013).
[11] C. M. Quintana, Yu Chen, D. Sank, A. G. Petukhov,
T. C. White, Dvir Kafri, B. Chiaro, A. Megrant,
R. Barends, B. Campbell, Z. Chen, A. Dunsworth,
A. G. Fowler, R. Graﬀ, E. Jeﬀrey, J. Kelly,
E. Lucero, J. Y. Mutus, M. Neeley, C. Neill, P. J. J.
O’Malley, P. Roushan, A. Shabani, V. N. Smelyanskiy,
A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner, H. Neven, and John M.
Martinis, “Observation of Classical-Quantum Crossover
of 1/f Flux Noise and Its Paramagnetic Temperature
Dependence,” Phys. Rev. Lett.118, 057702 (2017).
[12] Filip K. Malinowski, Frederico Martins, Łukasz Cy-
wiński, Mark S. Rudner, Peter D. Nissen, Saeed Fallahi,
Geoﬀrey C. Gardner, Michael J. Manfra, Charles M.
Marcus, and Ferdinand Kuemmeth, “Spectrum of the
Nuclear Environment for GaAs Spin Qubits,” Phys.
Rev. Lett.118, 177702 (2017).
[13] R. Barends, J. Kelly, A. Megrant, A. Veitia,
D. Sank, E. Jeﬀrey, T. C. White, J. Mutus, A. G.
Fowler, B. Campbell, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro,
A. Dunsworth, C. Neill, P. O’Malley, P. Roushan,
A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner, A. N. Korotkov, A. N. Cle-
land, and John M. Martinis, “Superconducting quan-
tum circuits at the surface code threshold for fault tol-
erance,” Nature508, 500–503 (2014).
[14] Robin Blume-Kohout, John King Gamble, Erik Nielsen,
Kenneth Rudinger, Jonathan Mizrahi, Kevin Fortier,
and Peter Maunz, “Demonstration of qubit operations
below a rigorous fault tolerance threshold with gate set
tomography,” Nature Communications8, 1–13 (2017).
[15] Kaveh Khodjasteh and Lorenza Viola, “Dynamically
Error-Corrected Gates for Universal Quantum Compu-
tation,” Phys. Rev. Lett.102, 080501 (2009).
[16] Pascal Cerfontaine, Tobias Hangleiter, and Hendrik
Bluhm, “Filter Functions for Quantum Processes under
Correlated Noise,” [Reference inserted by publisher].
[17] A. G. Kofman and G. Kurizki, “Universal dynamical
control of quantum mechanical decay: Modulation of
the coupling to the continuum,” Phys. Rev. Lett.87,
270405–270405–4 (2001).
[18] John M. Martinis, S. Nam, J. Aumentado, K. M. Lang,
andC.Urbina,“Decoherenceofasuperconductingqubit
due to bias noise,” Phys. Rev. B67, 094510 (2003).
[19] Götz S. Uhrig, “Keeping a Quantum Bit Alive by Opti-
mizedπ-Pulse Sequences,” Phys. Rev. Lett.98, 100504
(2007).
[20] Łukasz Cywiński, Roman M. Lutchyn, Cody P. Nave,
and S. Das Sarma, “How to enhance dephasing time
in superconducting qubits,” Phys. Rev. B77, 174509
(2008).
[21] Gonzalo A. Álvarez and Dieter Suter, “Measuring the
Spectrum of Colored Noise by Dynamical Decoupling,”
Phys. Rev. Lett.107, 230501 (2011).
[22] Jonas Bylander, Simon Gustavsson, Fei Yan, Fumiki
Yoshihara, Khalil Harrabi, George Fitch, David G.
Cory, Yasunobu Nakamura, Jaw-Shen Tsai, and
William D. Oliver, “Noise spectroscopy through dynam-
ical decoupling with a superconducting ﬂux qubit,” Na-
ture Physics7, 565–570 (2011).
[23] Gerardo A. Paz-Silva, Leigh M. Norris, and Lorenza
Viola, “Multiqubit spectroscopy of Gaussian quantum
noise,” Phys. Rev. A95, 022121 (2017).
[24] Michael J. Biercuk, Hermann Uys, Aaron P. VanDeven-
der, Nobuyasu Shiga, Wayne M. Itano, and John J.
Bollinger, “Optimized dynamical decoupling in a model
quantum memory.” Nature458, 996–1000 (2009).
[25] Hermann Uys, Michael J. Biercuk, and John J.
Bollinger, “Optimized Noise Filtration through Dynam-
ical Decoupling,” Phys. Rev. Lett.103, 040501 (2009).
[26] A.Soare, H.Ball, D.Hayes, J.Sastrawan, M.C.Jarratt,
J. J. Mcloughlin, X. Zhen, T. J. Green, and M. J. Bier-
cuk, “Experimental noise ﬁltering by quantum control,”
Nature Physics10, 825–829 (2014).
[27] Filip K. Malinowski, Frederico Martins, Peter D. Nis-
sen, Edwin Barnes, Łukasz Cywiński, Mark S. Rudner,
Saeed Fallahi, Geoﬀrey C. Gardner, Michael J. Manfra,
Charles M. Marcus, and Ferdinand Kuemmeth, “Notch
ﬁltering the nuclear environment of a spin qubit,” Na-
ture Nanotechnology12, 16–20 (2016).
[28] Todd Green, Hermann Uys, and Michael J. Biercuk,

32
“High-order noise ﬁltering in nontrivial quantum logic
gates,” Phys. Rev. Lett.109, 020501 (2012).
[29] Todd J. Green, Jarrah Sastrawan, Hermann Uys, and
Michael J. Biercuk, “Arbitrary quantum control of
qubits in the presence of universal noise,” New Journal
of Physics15, 095004 (2013).
[30] Utkan Güngördü and J. P. Kestner, “Pulse sequence de-
signed for robustC-phase gates in SiMOS and Si/SiGe
double quantum dots,” Phys. Rev. B98, 165301 (2018).
[31] Harrison Ball, Michael J. Biercuk, Andre Carvalho, Ji-
ayin Chen, Michael Hush, Leonardo A. De Castro, Li Li,
Per J. Liebermann, Harry J. Slatyer, Claire Edmunds,
Virginia Frey, Cornelius Hempel, and Alistair Milne,
“Software tools for quantum control: Improving quan-
tumcomputerperformancethroughnoiseanderrorsup-
pression,” (2020), arXiv:2001.04060.
[32] Wilhelm Magnus, “On the exponential solution of diﬀer-
ential equations for a linear operator,” Communications
on Pure and Applied Mathematics7, 649–673 (1954).
[33] S. Blanes, F. Casas, J.A. Oteo, and J. Ros, “The Mag-
nus expansion and some of its applications,” Physics Re-
ports 470, 151–238 (2009).
[34] Gerardo A. Paz-Silva and Lorenza Viola, “General
Transfer-Function Approach to Noise Filtering in Open-
Loop Quantum Control,” Phys. Rev. Lett.113, 250501
(2014).
[35] Jens Clausen, Guy Bensky, and Gershon Kurizki,
“Bath-Optimized Minimal-Energy Protection of Quan-
tum Operations from Decoherence,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
104, 040401 (2010).
[36] Chingiz Kabytayev, Todd J. Green, Kaveh Khod-
jasteh, Michael J. Biercuk, Lorenza Viola, and Ken-
neth R. Brown, “Robustness of composite pulses to
time-dependent control noise,” Phys. Rev. A90, 012316
(2014).
[37] Harrison Ball, Thomas M. Stace, Steven T. Flammia,
and Michael J. Biercuk, “Eﬀect of noise correlations on
randomized benchmarking,” Phys. Rev. A93, 022303
(2016).
[38] J.P.G. van Dijk, E. Kawakami, R.N. Schouten, M. Veld-
horst, L.M.K. Vandersypen, M. Babaie, E. Charbon,
and F. Sebastiano, “Impact of Classical Control Elec-
tronics on Qubit Fidelity,” Phys. Rev. Applied 12,
044054 (2019).
[39] Ryogo Kubo, “Generalized Cumulant Expansion
Method,” J. Phys. Soc. Japan17, 1100–1120 (1962).
[40] Ryogo Kubo, “Stochastic Liouville Equations,” J. Math.
Phys. 4, 174–183 (1963).
[41] Tobias Hangleiter, Isabel Nha Minh Le, and Ju-
lian D. Teske, “ﬁlter_functions: A package for eﬃ-
cient numerical calculation of generalized ﬁlter func-
tions to describe the eﬀect of noise on quantum gate
operations,” (2021), available athttps://github.com/
qutech/filter_functions/.
[42] J.R. Johansson, P.D. Nation, and Franco Nori, “QuTiP
2: A Python framework for the dynamics of open quan-
tum systems,” Computer Physics Communications184,
1234–1240 (2013).
[43] J. D. Teske, P. Cerfontaine, and H. Bluhm, “qopt: A
Qubit Simulation and Quantum Optimal Control Pack-
age,” in preparation.
[44] Karl Kraus, A. Böhm, J. D. Dollard, and W. H. Woot-
ters, eds.,States, Eﬀects, and Operations Fundamental
Notions of Quantum Theory, Lecture Notes in Physics,
Vol. 190 (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidel-
berg, 1983).
[45] Michael A. Nielsen and Isaac L. Chuang, Quantum
Computation and Quantum Information: 10th Anniver-
sary Edition, 10th ed. (Cambridge University Press,
2011).
[46] Isaac L. Chuang and M. A. Nielsen, “Prescription for ex-
perimental determination of the dynamics of a quantum
black box,” Journal of Modern Optics44, 2455–2467
(1997).
[47] J. F. Poyatos, J. I. Cirac, and P. Zoller, “Complete
Characterization of a Quantum Process: The Two-Bit
Quantum Gate,” Phys. Rev. Lett.78, 390–393 (1997).
[48] Robin Blume-Kohout, John King Gamble, Erik Nielsen,
Jonathan Mizrahi, Jonathan D. Sterk, and Peter
Maunz, “Robust, self-consistent, closed-form tomogra-
phy of quantum logic gates on a trapped ion qubit,”
(2013), arXiv:1310.4492.
[49] Daniel Greenbaum, “Introduction to Quantum Gate Set
Tomography,” (2015), arXiv:1509.02921.
[50] Easwar Magesan, Jay M. Gambetta, B. R. Johnson,
Colm A. Ryan, Jerry M. Chow, Seth T. Merkel, Mar-
cus P. da Silva, George A. Keefe, Mary B. Rothwell,
Thomas A. Ohki, Mark B. Ketchen, and M. Steﬀen,
“Eﬃcient Measurement of Quantum Gate Error by In-
terleaved Randomized Benchmarking,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
109, 080505 (2012).
[51] Shelby Kimmel, Marcus P. da Silva, Colm A. Ryan,
Blake R. Johnson, and Thomas Ohki, “Robust Ex-
traction of Tomographic Information via Randomized
Benchmarking,” Phys. Rev. X4, 011050 (2014).
[52] Yoshihiro Nambu and Kazuo Nakamura, “On the Ma-
trix Representation of Quantum Operations,” (2005),
arXiv:quant-ph/0504091.
[53] U. Fano, “Description of States in Quantum Mechan-
ics by Density Matrix and Operator Techniques,” Rev.
Mod. Phys.29, 74–93 (1957).
[54] Yuan-Chi Yang, S. N. Coppersmith, and Mark Friesen,
“Achieving high-ﬁdelity single-qubit gates in a strongly
driven charge qubit with1/f charge noise,” npj Quan-
tum Inf.5, 12 (2019).
[55] The identity commutes with the control Hamiltonian at
all times and hence does not generate any evolution in
the interaction picture in which we work later on (c.f.
Eq. (13)).
[56] The same argument forms the basis for the perturbative
approach for non-Gaussian noise.
[57] P.C.Moan, J.A.Oteo, andJ.Ros,“Ontheexistenceof
the exponential solution of linear diﬀerential systems,”
Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General32,
5133–5139 (1999).
[58] Félix Beaudoin and W. A. Coish, “Microscopic mod-
els for charge-noise-induced dephasing of solid-state
qubits,” Phys. Rev. B91, 165432 (2015).
[59] Kyle Willick, Daniel K. Park, and Jonathan Baugh,
“Eﬃcient continuous-wave noise spectroscopy beyond
weak coupling,” Phys. Rev. A98, 013414 (2018).
[60] The ensemble average represents the expectation value
over identical repetitions of an operation in an experi-
ment. It can be taken to be a spatial ensemble of many
identical systems, e.g. an NMR system, or, for ergodic
systems, a time ensemble of a single system under sta-
tionary noise as would be the case for a single spin mea-
sured repeatedly, for instance.

33
[61] P Szańkowski, G Ramon, J Krzywda, D Kwiatkowski,
and Ł Cywiński, “Environmental noise spectroscopy
with qubits subjected to dynamical decoupling,” Jour-
nal of Physics: Condensed Matter29, 333001 (2017).
[62] In the Liouville representation, the ﬁrst term is an anti-
symmetric matrix that generates a rotation and the sec-
ond a symmetric matrix that generates a deformation
of the generalized,d2− 1-dimensional Bloch sphere.
[63] Pascal Cerfontaine, René Otten, and Hendrik Bluhm,
“Self-Consistent Calibration of Quantum-Gate Sets,”
Phys. Rev. Applied13, 044071 (2020).
[64] Shelby Kimmel, Guang Hao Low, and Theodore J.
Yoder, “Robust calibration of a universal single-qubit
gate set via robust phase estimation,” Phys. Rev. A92,
062315 (2015).
[65] Mark Byrd and Daniel Lidar, “Bang–Bang Operations
from a Geometric Perspective,” Quantum Inf. Process.
1, 19–34 (2002).
[66] Note the similarity to the relationship of a transfer ma-
trix with the χ–matrix,Eij = ∑
klχklTikjl, with χkl
deﬁned byE(ρ) = ∑
klχklCkρCl or, in terms of the
Kraus operators Ki of the quantum operation,χkl =∑
i tr(KiCk)tr(K†
iCl) =
[∑
i|Ki⟩⟩⟨⟨Ki|
]
kl [49].
[67] Leigh M. Norris, Gerardo A. Paz-Silva, and Lorenza
Viola, “Qubit Noise Spectroscopy for Non-Gaussian De-
phasing Environments,” Phys. Rev. Lett.116, 150503
(2016).
[68] Daniel Loss and David P. DiVincenzo, “Quantum com-
putation with quantum dots,” Phys. Rev. A57, 120–126
(1998).
[69] Thaddeus D. Ladd, Fedor Jelezko, Raymond Laﬂamme,
Yasunobu Nakamura, Christopher Monroe, and
Jeremy L. O’Brien, “Quantum Computing,” Nature
464, 45–53 (2010).
[70] Jerry M. Chow, Jay M. Gambetta, A. D. Córcoles,
Seth T. Merkel, John A. Smolin, Chad Rigetti, S. Po-
letto, George A. Keefe, Mary B. Rothwell, J. R. Rozen,
Mark B. Ketchen, and M. Steﬀen, “Universal Quantum
Gate Set Approaching Fault-Tolerant Thresholds with
Superconducting Qubits,” Phys. Rev. Lett.109, 060501
(2012).
[71] Michał Horodecki, Paweł Horodecki, and Ryszard
Horodecki, “General teleportation channel, singlet frac-
tion, and quasidistillation,” Phys. Rev. A60, 1888–1898
(1999).
[72] Michael A. Nielsen, “A simple formula for the aver-
age gate ﬁdelity of a quantum dynamical operation,”
Physics Letters A303, 249–252 (2002).
[73] Joel J. Wallman and Steven T. Flammia, “Randomized
benchmarking with conﬁdence,” New Journal of Physics
16, 103032 (2014).
[74] Jens Koch, Terri M. Yu, Jay Gambetta, A. A. Houck,
D. I. Schuster, J. Majer, Alexandre Blais, M. H. De-
voret, S. M. Girvin, and R. J. Schoelkopf, “Charge-
insensitive qubit design derived from the Cooper pair
box,” Phys. Rev. A76, 042319 (2007).
[75] J. R. Petta, A. C. Johnson, J. M. Taylor, E. A. Laird,
A. Yacoby, M. D. Lukin, C. M. Marcus, M. P. Hanson,
and A. C. Gossard, “Coherent Manipulation of Coupled
Electron Spins in Semiconductor Quantum Dots,” Sci-
ence 309, 2180–2184 (2005).
[76] Christopher J. Wood and Jay M. Gambetta, “Quan-
tiﬁcation and characterization of leakage errors,” Phys.
Rev. A97, 032306 (2018).
[77] Gen Kimura, “The Bloch vector for N-level systems,”
Physics Letters A314, 339–349 (2003).
[78] Reinhold A Bertlmann and Philipp Krammer, “Bloch
vectors for qudits,” Journal of Physics A: Mathematical
and Theoretical41, 235303 (2008).
[79] F. T. Hioe and J. H. Eberly, “N-Level Coherence Vec-
tor and Higher Conservation Laws in Quantum Optics
and Quantum Mechanics,” Phys. Rev. Lett.47, 838–841
(1981).
[80] Don Coppersmith and Shmuel Winograd, “Matrix mul-
tiplication via arithmetic progressions,” Journal of Sym-
bolic Computation9, 251–280 (1990).
[81] See Supplementary Material at [URL inserted by pub-
lisher] for a current snapshot of the software package.
[82] Charles R. Harris, K. Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J. van der
Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David Cour-
napeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg,
Nathaniel J. Smith, Robert Kern, Matti Picus, Stephan
Hoyer, Marten H. van Kerkwijk, Travis E. Oliphant,
et al., “Array programming with NumPy,” Nature585,
357–362 (2020).
[83] Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E. Oliphant,
Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Cournapeau,
Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser,
Jonathan Bright, Stéfan J. van der Walt, Matthew
Brett, Joshua Wilson, K. Jarrod Millman, Nikolay May-
orov, and SciPy 1.0 Contributors, “SciPy 1.0: funda-
mental algorithms for scientiﬁc computing in Python,”
Nature Methods17, 261–272 (2020).
[84] John D. Hunter, “Matplotlib: A 2D Graphics Environ-
ment,” Computing in Science & Engineering9, 90–95
(2007).
[85] Daniel G. A. Smith and Johnnie Gray, “opt_einsum -
A Python package for optimizing contraction order for
einsum-like expressions,” Journal of Open Source Soft-
ware 3, 753 (2018).
[86] https://github.com/pydata/sparse/.
[87] https://github.com/qutech/qopt/.
[88] Note that while the calculation of the frequency shifts
∆ is implemented, it should at time of publication be
understood as preliminary and not thoroughly tested.
[89] E. L. Hahn, “Spin Echoes,” Phys. Rev.80, 580–594
(1950).
[90] Isabel Nha Minh Le, Julian D. Teske, Tobias Hangleiter,
Pascal Cerfontaine, and Hendrik Bluhm, “Analytic Fil-
ter Function Derivatives for Quantum Optimal Con-
trol,” arXiv:2103.09126.
[91] S. Humpohl, L. Prediger, L. Lankes, A. Willmes, P. Cer-
fontaine, P. Bethke, E. Kammerloher, L. Schreiber,
S. Meyer, B. Rumpe, and H. Bluhm, “qutech/qupulse,”
(2021), available at https://github.com/qutech/
qupulse/.
[92] S. Humpohl, L. Prediger, L. Lankes, A. Willmes, P. Cer-
fontaine, P. Bethke, E. Kammerloher, L. Schreiber,
S. Meyer, B. Rumpe, and H. Bluhm, “qupulse: A
quantum computing pulse parametrization & sequenc-
ing framework,” in preparation.
[93] Thomas Kluyver, Benjamin Ragan-kelley, Fernando
Pérez, Brian Granger, Matthias Bussonnier, Jonathan
Frederic, Kyle Kelley, Jessica Hamrick, Jason Grout,
Sylvain Corlay, Paul Ivanov, Damián Avila, Saﬁa Ab-
dalla, and Carol Willing, “Jupyter Notebooks—a pub-
lishing format for reproducible computational work-
ﬂows,” inPositioning and Power in Academic Publish-

34
ing: Players, Agents and Agendas(2016) pp. 87–90.
[94] Pascal Cerfontaine, René Otten, M. A. Wolfe, Patrick
Bethke, and Hendrik Bluhm, “High-ﬁdelity gate set for
exchange-coupled singlet-triplet qubits,” Phys. Rev. B
101, 155311 (2020).
[95] A. Wallraﬀ, D. I. Schuster, A. Blais, L. Frunzio, R. S.
Huang, J. Majer, S. Kumar, S. M. Girvin, and R. J.
Schoelkopf, “Strong coupling of a single photon to a su-
perconducting qubit using circuit quantum electrody-
namics,” Nature431, 162–167 (2004).
[96] E.T. Jaynes and F.W. Cummings, “Comparison of
quantum and semiclassical radiation theories with ap-
plication to the beam maser,” Proceedings of the IEEE
51, 89–109 (1963).
[97] Christopher Gerry, Peter Knight, and Peter L Knight,
Introductory quantum optics (Cambridge university
press, 2005).
[98] Fei Yan, Simon Gustavsson, Jonas Bylander, Xiaoyue
Jin, Fumiki Yoshihara, David G. Cory, Yasunobu Naka-
mura, Terry P. Orlando, and William D. Oliver,
“Rotating-frame relaxation as a noise spectrum anal-
yser of a superconducting qubit undergoing driven evo-
lution,” Nature Communications4, 2337 (2013).
[99] D. M. Zajac, A. J. Sigillito, M. Russ, F. Borjans, J. M.
Taylor, G.Burkard, andJ.R.Petta,“Resonantlydriven
CNOT gate for electron spins,” Science359, 439–442
(2018).
[100] Jarryd J. Pla, Kuan Y. Tan, Juan P. Dehollain, Wee H.
Lim, John J. L. Morton, David N. Jamieson, Andrew S.
Dzurak, and Andrea Morello, “A single-atom electron
spin qubit in silicon,” Nature489, 541–545 (2012).
[101] Chunqing Deng, Jean-Luc Orgiazzi, Feiruo Shen, Sahel
Ashhab, and Adrian Lupascu, “Observation of Floquet
States in a Strongly Driven Artiﬁcial Atom,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 115, 133601 (2015).
[102] E. Knill, D. Leibfried, R. Reichle, J. Britton, R. B.
Blakestad, J. D. Jost, C. Langer, R. Ozeri, S. Sei-
delin, and D. J. Wineland, “Randomized benchmarking
of quantum gates,” Phys. Rev. A77, 012307 (2008).
[103] Easwar Magesan, J. M. Gambetta, and Joseph Emer-
son, “Scalable and robust randomized benchmarking
of quantum processes,” Phys. Rev. Lett.106, 180504
(2011).
[104] The Cliﬀord group is a subgroup of the special unitary
group with the advantage that compositions are easy to
compute and that averaging over all unitaries can under
reasonable assumptions be replaced by averaging over
all Cliﬀords. This makes the Cliﬀord gates a convenient
choice for benchmarking. For a nice, short introduction
as well as further references, see [124].
[105] Jeﬀrey M. Epstein, Andrew W. Cross, Easwar Mage-
san, and Jay M. Gambetta, “Investigating the limits of
randomized benchmarking protocols,” Phys. Rev. A89,
062321 (2014).
[106] M. A. Fogarty, M. Veldhorst, R. Harper, C. H. Yang,
S. D. Bartlett, S. T. Flammia, and A. S. Dzurak, “Non-
exponential ﬁdelity decay in randomized benchmarking
with low-frequency noise,” Phys. Rev. A92, 022326
(2015).
[107] Guanru Feng, Joel J Wallman, Brandon Buonacorsi,
Franklin H Cho, Daniel K Park, Tao Xin, Dawei Lu,
JonathanBaugh, andRaymondLaﬂamme,“Estimating
the Coherence of Noise in Quantum Control of a Solid-
State Qubit,” Phys. Rev. Lett.117, 260501 (2016).
[108] S. Mavadia, C. L. Edmunds, C. Hempel, H. Ball, F. Roy,
T. M. Stace, and M. J. Biercuk, “Experimental quan-
tum veriﬁcation in the presence of temporally correlated
noise,” npj Quantum Inf.4, 7 (2018).
[109] C. L. Edmunds, C. Hempel, R. J. Harris, V. Frey, T. M.
Stace, and M. J. Biercuk, “Dynamically corrected gates
suppressing spatiotemporal error correlations as mea-
sured by randomized benchmarking,” Phys. Rev. Re-
search 2, 013156 (2020).
[110] Pascal Cerfontaine, Tim Botzem, Julian Ritzmann, Si-
mon Sebastian Humpohl, Arne Ludwig, Dieter Schuh,
Dominique Bougeard, Andreas D. Wieck, and Hendrik
Bluhm, “Closed-loop control of a GaAs-based singlet-
triplet spin qubit with 99.5% gate ﬁdelity and low leak-
age,” Nature Communications11, 4144 (2020).
[111] For a precise ﬁdelity estimate, the infrared cutoﬀ should
be extended to f = 0 . However, we are only inter-
ested in a qualitative picture and neglect this part of
the spectrum here. At frequencies much smaller than
≈ 1/τ where τ is the duration of the entire control
operation, the ﬁlter function is constant and we there-
fore do not disregard any interesting features by setting
fIR = 10−2/
τ = 10−2/
mmaxτmax.
[112] Navin Khaneja, Timo Reiss, Cindie Kehlet, Thomas
Schulte-Herbrüggen, and Steﬀen J. Glaser, “Optimal
control of coupled spin dynamics: design of NMR pulse
sequences by gradient ascent algorithms,” Journal of
Magnetic Resonance172, 296 – 305 (2005).
[113] T. Schulte-Herbrüggen, A. Spörl, N. Khaneja, and
S. J. Glaser, “Optimal control-based eﬃcient synthesis
of building blocks of quantum algorithms: A perspec-
tive from network complexity towards time complexity,”
Phys. Rev. A72, 042331 (2005).
[114] Tommaso Caneva, Tommaso Calarco, and Simone
Montangero, “Chopped random-basis quantum opti-
mization,” Phys. Rev. A84, 022326 (2011).
[115] D. Coppersmith, “An approximate Fourier transform
useful in quantum factoring,” (2002), arXiv:quant-
ph/0201067.
[116] Peter W. Shor, “Polynomial-Time Algorithms for Prime
Factorization and Discrete Logarithms on a Quantum
Computer,” SIAM Journal on Computing26, 1484–
1509 (1997).
[117] Tatsuro Yuge, Susumu Sasaki, and Yoshiro Hirayama,
“Measurement of the Noise Spectrum Using a Multiple-
Pulse Sequence,” Phys. Rev. Lett.107, 170504 (2011).
[118] Heinz-Peter Breuer and Francesco Petruccione, The
Theory of Open Quantum Systems(Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 2007) p. 656.
[119] Simon J. Devitt, William J. Munro, and Kae Nemoto,
“Quantum error correction for beginners,” Reports on
Progress in Physics76, 076001 (2013).
[120] Hui Khoon Ng, Daniel A. Lidar, and John Preskill,
“Combining dynamical decoupling with fault-tolerant
quantum computation,” Phys. Rev. A 84, 012305
(2011).
[121] Naomi H. Nickerson and Benjamin J. Brown,
“Analysing correlated noise on the surface code using
adaptive decoding algorithms,” Quantum3, 131 (2019).
[122] A.G.KofmanandG.Kurizki,“Accelerationofquantum
decay processes by frequent observations,” Nature405,
546–550 (2000).
[123] Adam Zaman Chaudhry, “A general framework for the
QuantumZenoandanti-Zenoeﬀects,” ScientiﬁcReports

35
6 (2016), 10.1038/srep29497. [124] M¯ aris Ozols, “Cliﬀord group,” Essays at University of
Waterloo, Spring (2008).